184
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
© 2023                               IMIA and  Georg Thieme Verlag KG
Health Information Exchange: 
Understanding the Policy Landscape and 
Future of Data Interoperability
A Jay Holmgren1, Moritz Esdar2, Jens Hüsers2, João Coutinho-Almeida3
1	 University of California, San Francisco, USA
2	 University of Applied Sciences Osnabrueck, Germany
3	 Porto University, Portugal
Summary
Objectives: To review recent literature on health information 
exchange (HIE), focusing on the policy approach of five case 
study nations: the United States of America, the United Kingdom, 
Germany, Israel, and Portugal, as well as synthesize lessons 
learned across countries and provide recommendations for future 
research.
Methods: A narrative review of each nation’s HIE policy frame­
works, current state, and future HIE strategy.
Results: Key themes that emerged include the importance of both 
central decision-making as well as local innovation, the multiple 
and complex challenges of broad HIE adoption, and the varying 
role of HIE across different national health system structures.
Conclusion: HIE is an increasingly important capability and 
policy priority as electronic health record (EHR) adoption becomes 
more common and care delivery is increasingly digitized. While 
all five case study nations have adopted some level of HIE, there 
are significant differences across their level of data sharing in­
frastructure and maturity, and each nation took a different policy 
approach. While identifying generalizable strategies across dispa­
rate international systems is challenging, there are several com­
mon themes across successful HIE policy frameworks, such as the 
importance of central government prioritization of data sharing. 
Finally, we make several recommendations for future research to 
expand the breadth and depth of the literature on HIE and guide 
future decision-making by policymakers and practitioners.
Keywords
Health Information Exchange, interoperability, data sharing, 
health information technology, electronic health records
Yearb Med Inform 2023:184-94
http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-1768719
1   Introduction
As health care has modernized in the 21st 
century, moving away from paper-based re­
cord keeping to digital workflows following 
the broad adoption of electronic health re­
cords (EHRs), health information exchange 
(HIE) and data interoperability – the process 
of electronically sharing data across unaffil­
iated organizations including care delivery 
providers, payers, public health agencies, 
and more - have become increasingly cru­
cial components of a modern health system 
[1, 2]. Not only is widespread HIE critical 
to providing clinicians with a full picture of 
patient health status at the point of care to 
ensure quality and safety, robust interoper­
ability could also slow medical cost growth 
through a reduction in duplicative utiliza­
tion [3], and may reduce administrative bur­
den on patients by letting their data follow 
them seamlessly across the continuum of 
care [4]. Further, the COVID-19 pandemic 
has illustrated the importance of readi­
ly-available patient and population-level 
health data aggregated across care delivery 
organizations – one of several critical HIE 
use cases [5]. Building a robust interopera­
ble health system is therefore an important 
policy goal, and is essential to realizing the 
value of the significant investment made in 
digitizing health care delivery over the past 
several decades.
HIE appears simple in concept – the 
idea that all health data should be readily 
available to the patient and clinicians at the 
point of care, regardless of where that data 
was generated. However, the implementation 
of large-scale, robust HIE infrastructure and 
capabilities has proven difficult in health 
systems across the world [6, 7]. Building 
connectivity between unaffiliated health 
care organizations presents a wide array of 
challenges, ranging from technical issues 
around data standards, governance problems 
with what data is shared and who owns it, 
privacy and security concerns for both 
patients and organizations, costs of tech­
nology and implementation, competitive 
disincentives to allow data to flow easily to 
other organizations, and workflow questions 
on how to best present busy clinicians with 
actionable knowledge without burdening 
them with irrelevant information. These 
challenges are situated within the broader 
policy framework of each nation, both their 
specific approach to HIE as well as how they 
organize care delivery in general. For ex­
ample, in some nations HIE faces financial 
disincentives as health care organizations 
are reluctant to share patient data that they 
see as a key strategic asset in a competi­
tive market [8, 9]. Additionally, while the 
theoretical benefits of HIE are obvious, 
demonstrating value to patients, clinicians, 
and health systems at scale has been more 
difficult. There remain critical unanswered 
questions around HIE and interoperable 
data exchange, including how different 
public policy approaches have resulted in 
varying levels of HIE adoption and use, best 
practices for integrating HIE into clinical, 
reporting and administrative workflows, 
and identifying where HIE can generate 
the most value across a range of clinical, 
financial, and administrative scenarios. 
Article published online: 2023-07-06
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
185
Health Information Exchange: Understanding the Policy Landscape and Future of Data Interoperability
In this survey paper, we discuss the 
concept and types of HIE, the benefits and 
challenges of implementing HIE systems, 
and use national case studies to highlight the 
diverse set of approaches to HIE from five 
different countries. We focus our review spe­
cifically on examining the policy frameworks 
employed by our case study nations around 
data sharing between acute care delivery 
organizations, and how they have influenced 
the development of HIE in each country. We 
then synthesize the current literature on HIE 
and provide recommendations for future 
work. Focusing on recent literature, we pro­
vide readers with a look at the current state of 
global research relating to HIE and identify 
opportunities for the informatics community 
to advance our knowledge and understanding 
of HIE across a range of domains. 
2   Methods
We conducted a narrative review of the HIE 
and interoperability literature in both the 
peer reviewed and grey literature, focusing 
on highlighting the history, current state, and 
future strategy of five case study nations: 
the United States of America, the United 
Kingdom, Germany, Israel, and Portugal. 
We specifically focused on identifying lit­
erature from the last three years but did not 
exclude older or non-peer reviewed articles 
which provided important context or the 
most up-to-date information. The search 
strategy was broken down into three steps. 
First, we combined relevant search terms 
for identifying current research articles in 
the respective countries in MEDLINE via 
PubMed and Google Scholar: 
	
(health OR healthcare OR clinical OR 
medical) AND (information exchange 
OR data sharing OR data exchange OR 
information sharing OR interoperability) 
AND (United States OR Germany OR 
United Kingdom OR England OR NHS 
OR Israel OR Portugal)
Second, we researched the official websites 
of the respective health authorities for 
additional resources (e.g., strategy papers, 
government reports, policy documents or 
other information on current legislation). 
Third, we complemented the search with 
additional grey literature based on leads 
from the sources found in the first two steps. 
Furthermore, to contrast the state of HIE 
between the selected countries along com­
parable dimensions, we used the identified 
literature alongside complementary sources 
to classify: 1) the level of EHR adoption 
in acute care organizations (as an essential 
prerequisite for HIE); 2) the overall HIE 
maturity; 3) the level of HIE centralization; 
and 4) level of incentivization for HIE as 
either “low”, “moderate”, or “high” for each 
country (Table 1). We then summarized our 
findings across these international contexts 
to create a synthesized set of lessons learned, 
as well as areas for future study and research. 
3   Results
3.1   Health Information Exchange 
– The Concept, The Verb, the Noun
As discussed in the introduction, the goal of 
HIE sounds simple – all health information 
should be available to the appropriate users 
(patients, clinicians, public health agencies, 
etc.) whenever necessary, regardless of 
where that data was generated. However, 
operationalizing this idea requires consid­
eration of many socio-technical issues, e.g., 
What data should be shared with whom? 
What specific data elements? Who should 
access the data? How should data be ac­
cessed? Should the patients opt-in to data 
sharing, or should they be enrolled by default 
with the ability to opt-out? What standards 
and processes should be used to capture 
and transfer data and to ensure data privacy 
and security? These difficult questions, 
and many more, illustrate the complexity 
in turning HIE from an idea into a reality. 
HIE can therefore represent a wide array 
of electronic data sharing – ranging from 
sending flat PDF files via secure email to se­
mantic interoperability, where standardized, 
structured, machine-readable data elements 
are transferred and integrated directly into 
the receiving organization’s EHR without 
manual intervention [10, 11]. HIE can be a 
“push”, where a health system or provider 
sends patient data to another provider during 
a transition of care, or a “pull”, where the 
receiving system queries for any patient data 
available from other providers. 
The term “HIE” is frequently used as both 
a verb and a noun [12, 13]. HIE the verb 
refers to the act of data transfer, sharing data 
between two health care organizations, of 
which there are many possible technical ap­
proaches and mechanisms of data exchange. 
HIE the noun, however, most frequently 
refers to an organization that is facilitat­
ing the data transfer, sometimes known as 
health information exchange organizations 
(HIOs). They are most often vendor-neutral, 
compared to the vendor-mediated tools that 
connect organizations using the same EHR 
vendor [14], and HIOs provide technical 
capability and governance frameworks for 
data exchange [15, 16]. In the United States 
Table 1   Dimensions of Health Information Exchange Across Five Nations.
 
United States
Germany
The United 
Kingdom
Israel
Portugal
Electronic Health 
Record Adoption 
in Acute Care 
Organizations
High [21]
Moderate [52,104] 
High [58,106] 
High [72,109,110]
High [87,114] 
Overall Health 
Information Exchange 
Maturity
Moderate [27]
Low [49,52] 
Moderate to High [7,61,107] 
High [6,71,111] 
Moderate to High [79,80,82]
Level of Health 
Information Exchange 
Centralization
Low [14]
High [17] 
High [7,55]
Moderate [54,71,112]
Moderate to High [81,82]
Incentives for Health 
Information Exchange
Moderate [27]
Moderate [105]
Moderate to High [7,108]
High [71,112,113]
Moderate to High [83,84,93]
186
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
Holmgren et al
(US), for example, these organizations can 
be non-profit or for-profit, based in a specific 
geography (e.g., state or local) or national, 
and may be based on a specific framework 
designed to streamline data exchange across 
different platforms and technology vendors 
such as Carequality, and some HIEs are a 
“network-of-networks” that link several 
other HIEs together, while in Germany the 
gematik, a national eHealth organization, 
provides similar services but with a much 
broader mandate to set policy, standards, 
and governance relative to regional US 
HIOs [17, 18].
Finally, the terms HIE and interoperabil­
ity are often used interchangeably. However, 
they are distinct concepts – HIE involves any 
health data transfer, in any format, whereas 
interoperability refers specifically to the 
exchange of structured data elements. In 
this way, sending scanned paper files in PDF 
form electronically would represent HIE, 
but not interoperability, whereas data that 
was sent in a machine readable format and 
integrated into the receiving provider’s EHR 
would be described as interoperability [19]. 
3.2   The State of International 
Health Information Exchange:       
a study of five case nations
3.2.1   The United States of America 
Following the passage of the Health Infor­
mation Technology for Economic and Clin­
ical Health (HITECH) Act in 2009, acute 
care hospitals and primary care physician 
offices in the U.S. rapidly adopted EHRs in 
response to federal incentives included in 
the Meaningful Use (MU) program [1, 20, 
21]. While not as directly incentivized with 
payments to the same level as EHR adoption, 
a variety of public policies have focused on 
encouraging interoperability and HIE within 
US health care delivery organizations. Most 
directly, HITECH included several subsidies 
and grant programs to fund the creation, 
expansion, and operation of HIOs, often 
operating at the state or local level, to build 
HIE infrastructure. Several MU require­
ments in the later stages of the program 
directly incentivized at least some level of 
data sharing, such as requiring a certain pro­
portion of patient care transitions to outside 
organizations have summary of care records 
sent electronically, and the EHR certification 
program to attest to MU ensured that EHR 
products were able to send and receive data 
electronically. These requirements have 
been expanded by the Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services (CMS) Promoting 
Interoperability program [22]. Several policy 
initiatives have attempted to promote HIE 
adoption and use through aligning the finan­
cial incentives of care delivery organizations 
with data sharing, such as the proliferation 
of value-based payment models including 
bundled payments or Accountable Care 
Organizations (ACOs) that reward providers 
for reducing population-level utilization and 
spending [23]. These types of value-based 
payment reforms were intended to overcome 
the misaligned financial incentives in the fee-
for-service payment model for care delivery 
in the US, and which provides no financial 
incentive to use HIE to avoid redundant or 
unnecessary services [19, 24].
Despite the wide range of policy in­
centives targeted at encouraging HIE, the 
state of interoperability (within and across 
the health care delivery eco-system) in the 
US varies. The US Office of the National 
Coordinator for Health Information Technol­
ogy (ONC) tracks hospital interoperability 
using four domains of: 1) finding/querying 
for data; 2) sending data electronically; 3) 
receiving data electronically; and 4) inte­
grating outside data into the EHR without 
manual intervention [25, 26]. Reflecting 
the structure of the MU certification re­
quirements, as of 2018, the ability to send 
data electronically is nearly ubiquitous, with 
nearly 90% of hospitals reporting they often 
or routinely send patient summary of care 
records electronically. In contrast, fewer than 
two-thirds of US hospitals report being able 
to integrate outside data into their EHR, and 
less than half (45.4%) reported engaging in 
all four ONC’s interoperability domains [27]. 
Research has also found that hospitals and 
public health agencies lack bi-directional 
interoperability, which caused significant 
issues aggregating population-level data in 
the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic 
[5, 28, 29]. While interoperability has made 
progress over the past several years [30, 31], 
it has been significantly slower than EHR 
adoption [1, 21]. Ambulatory physician 
offices report even lower levels of interopera­
bility or HIE engagement, as they often lack 
the organizational resources such as a full-
time information technology staff to build 
and maintain HIE connections [32], though 
national-level data for these organizations is 
less detailed [33].
The current state of HIE and interop­
erability in the US is a patchwork of con­
nectivity without a centralized national 
HIE approach, and whether a patient’s data 
follows them as they transition across care 
providers is determined more by whether 
their organizations are on the same EHR 
vendor or participate in the same method of 
HIE. Significant heterogeneity in state policy 
for HIE, including different approaches to 
governance, financial support, data privacy 
and patient consent laws (opt-in vs opt-out), 
also contributes to variation in interoperable 
data exchange in the US [34, 35]. Many or­
ganizations report participating in multiple 
different modalities of sharing patient data, 
such as vendor (EHR)-based systems [36] as 
well as regional HIEs and national HIE net­
works [37]. Interoperability between acute 
care providers and other health care organi­
zations, including long-term care facilities 
or public health agencies, is also limited 
and uneven across the country [5, 38]. These 
results are the reflection of the somewhat 
scattered policy environment, with few 
prescriptive requirements and many diffuse 
and weak incentives to share data without a 
comprehensive path towards national-level 
interoperability. The value-based payment 
models to align financial incentives for data 
sharing were only modestly successful, with 
ACO hospitals sharing data with more types 
of partners, but with a lower overall volume 
of records exchanged relative to non-ACO 
participants [39, 40], and the lack of HIE in­
frastructure has presented a significant barrier 
for ambulatory practices participating in pop­
ulation health management programs [41]. 
Future Considerations & Strategy: In 
2016, Congress passed the 21st Century 
Cures Act (Cures), which included several 
provisions to improve patient access to data 
as well as interoperability between provider 
organizations. Cures provides a framework 
for HIE in the US, including provisions 
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
187
Health Information Exchange: Understanding the Policy Landscape and Future of Data Interoperability
such as outlawing “information blocking”, 
the practice of intentionally and knowingly 
blocking patient data access by health infor­
mation technology developers or health care 
provider organizations [8], as well as updates 
to the ONC EHR certification criteria to 
mandate the use of standardized application 
programming interfaces (APIs) that facili­
tate patient access to their own health data 
and HIE using a common set of standards 
known as Fast Healthcare Interoperability 
Resources (FHIR) [42]. Further, the act 
outlined the Trusted Exchange Framework 
and Common Agreement (TEFCA), a volun­
tary technology and governance model that 
seeks to streamline the exchange of patient 
data across the multiple fragmented HIO 
networks that exist in the US, reducing the 
need for provider organizations to participate 
in multiple HIE networks [43]. Rulemaking 
for the Cures Act was finalized in 2021, 
with information blocking and FHIR API 
requirements now in place, and the first 
several organizations designated as Qualified 
Health Information Networks (QHINs) in 
the TEFCA framework were named in early 
2023 with plans to go live within the next 
year [44,45]. This more prescriptive frame­
work represents a departure from previous 
efforts focused on aligning financial incen­
tives, and will hopefully deliver significant 
improvements to interoperability in the US. 
3.2.2   Germany
Germany initiated the development of a 
dedicated infrastructure for HIE, called the 
telematics infrastructure (TI), for the statu­
tory health insurance (SHI) system in 2004. 
The TI uses an opt-in patient consent model 
that also requires the patients provide their 
clinician with a physical card that autho­
rizes access and changes to the data stored 
in the TI. This was followed, however, by a 
prolonged timeframe of disagreements and 
mutual obstruction among the main share­
holders of the national organization that was 
made responsible for the development of the 
TI (the so-called gematik) [46]. The ensuing 
stalemate was said to be driven by a mix of 
poor federal governance, lack of a strate­
gy, lack of consensus-building, excessive 
data protection concerns on the part of the 
physician associations, and miss-aligned fi­
nancial incentives which severely hampered 
progress towards widespread HIE practices 
[46–50]. From 2016 on, renewed legislative 
efforts were made to implement the TI and 
to subsequently specify how data ought to 
be exchanged through a central EHR sys­
tem that utilizes the TI. Also, the federal 
ministry of health intervened in 2019 and 
took over the majority shares of the gematik 
to be able to undercut further deadlocks 
between the main parties (particularly the 
National Association of SHI Funds, the 
National Association of SHI Physicians, and 
the German Hospital Federation). 
As part of the latest legislative initiatives, 
the National Association of SHI Physicians 
was made exclusively responsible for spec­
ifying syntactic and semantic standards 
for exchanging health information via the 
central EHR system. Although this recently 
resulted in an increased focus on internation­
al standards (e.g., FHIR, SNOMED CT, and 
LOINC), Germany’s HIE capabilities remain 
at a low level. While all German EHRs are 
now required to be interoperable with the 
TI infrastructure [51], a survey from 2017 
showed that only a fraction of German hospi­
tals are able to regularly exchange data with 
other providers or the patients electronically 
[49]. More recent data corroborate these 
findings [52] – and note poor HIE between 
physicians in ambulatory care settings and 
low adoption rates of the central EHR by 
patients [17, 53]. However, the central EHR 
system and related components are still be­
ing developed and the current government 
has committed to switching from an opt-in 
to an opt-out principle for all members of 
the SHI, thus hoping to significantly increase 
HIE engagement. Still, Germany is gener­
ally considered to perform worse in HIE as 
compared to the US, England, Portugal and 
Israel [6, 54].
Future Considerations & Strategy: Ger­
many’s previous “hands-off” approach to 
facilitating HIE can hardly be classified as 
strategic. And with few exceptions, neither 
the health insurance companies nor the 
various providers or the state governments 
developed HIE systems themselves from 
the ‘bottom-up’. To cope with the resulting 
inadequacies, the federal ministry of health 
started intervening through numerous leg­
islative initiatives, especially after a change 
in leadership in 2018. These were primarily 
concerned with further developing the TI 
as a single, centralized HIE system and the 
central EHR system as well as a comprehen­
sive financial incentive program for hospitals 
that, among others, aims at the widespread 
adoption of patient portals to exchange data 
with the patients and other providers. From 
an organizational viewpoint, clearer lines 
of responsibilities were instituted within the 
self-governing bodies (e.g., the physician’s 
association was made solely responsible for 
defining standards to be used in the central 
EHR and the health insurance companies 
for providing the EHR to their beneficia­
ries). Additionally, a decree was issued in 
2021 to create a governance structure for 
ensuring universal interoperability with the 
so-called Interop Council at the center and 
binding directives for providers and vendors 
to adhere to certain standards. However, 
some of these initiatives were criticized as 
being reactive rather than proactive, partly 
disconnected from one another and at risk of 
creating parallel HIE structures. Hence, calls 
for a coherent strategy followed, which the 
current federal ministry has taken up and is 
expected to announce in 2023.
3.2.3   The United Kingdom
The English National Health Service (NHS) 
has had a long and checkered history of 
building its HIE capabilities [55]. Capital­
izing on its centralized make-up and con­
trol, the NHS has focused on defining and 
propagating technical and data standards as 
early as 1992. Significant investments were 
made early on which led to the incremental 
establishment of a connectivity framework, 
comprising the Health and Social Care 
Network, the “NHS Spine”, as well as 
various other central and local services for 
enabling HIE [7, 55]. Current rules for data 
sharing in the United Kingdom (UK) use 
an implied consent (or explicit ‘opt-out’) 
model for direct patient care purposes [56].
The NHS’s strategic approach has often 
been characterized as largely coming from 
the ‘top-down’ [55, 57]. Particularly the 
much-discussed National Programme for 
Information Technology (NPfIT) from 2003 
exhibited high degrees of central control. It 
188
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
Holmgren et al
attracted a lot of criticism and is said to have 
failed partly because of this high degree of 
centrality [57]. Still, the NPfIT contributed 
fundamentally to the connectivity framework 
in its current form. The NHS subsequently 
moved on to allow for more local variation 
in their following strategies, thus shifting 
towards what has been characterized as a 
‘middle-out’ approach [55].
The NHS’s early commitment to HIE, 
together with a convoluted interplay of 
policy and technology changes over time 
has resulted in a rather complex ecosystem 
of patient health records [58]. Perhaps most 
importantly, Summary Care Records (SCRs) 
containing basic patient information such 
as medications and allergies are available 
and used by almost all general practitioners 
via the NHS Spine digitally and this func­
tionality is required for EHRs [59], and 
more comprehensive shared records are 
increasingly being adopted by local NHS 
organizations and systems. The increase 
in shared records partly results from more 
recent initiatives – particularly the Informa­
tion Governance Framework for Integrated 
Health [60]. However, despite the NHS’s 
relatively advanced stage of HIE adoption 
[7], data sharing and interoperability chal­
lenges remain – particularly with regard to 
the EHR vendor specificity of HIE systems 
in place as well as information exchange 
with and between hospitals [58, 61]. While a 
recent study by Watkins et al. shows that the 
use and user satisfaction with an EHR ven­
dor-specific solution is quite high, another 
study by Warren et al. points to substantial 
misalignments and information exchange 
barriers that remain between hospital trusts 
that use different HIE solutions [58, 62]. 
Future Considerations & Strategy: The 
NHS continues to actively adjust and adapt 
its HIE strategy from a rather central angle 
while explicitly leaving room for variations 
by local NHS authorities and systems. Most 
recently, this finds expression in its 2022 
“data saves lives” strategy and in the substan­
tial reforms of its governance structure [63]. 
These activities might best be summarized 
as the ambition to consolidate, advance, 
and capitalize on its HIE capabilities. As a 
principal challenge in delivering universal 
interoperability still lies in the fragmentation 
of responsibilities for the HIE infrastructure 
[61], the NHS plans to consolidate the previ­
ously separated public bodies NHS Digital, 
NHSX and NHS Improvement under one 
roof in 2023 - that of NHS England to form a 
centralized, single HIE system. This consol­
idation is also reflected in the data strategy’s 
premise itself, which views HIE not as an 
isolated matter, but rather as an integral 
part of a wider and more far-reaching data 
strategy. It thereby, among other things, aims 
at giving patients greater control over their 
data and creating secure data environments 
for research. From a technical viewpoint, 
the strategy commits to enhancing the usage 
of international standards (particularly in 
the form of UK-wide HL7 FHIR Profiles), 
the usage of cloud services, and services to 
centrally find and retrieve records from the 
various systems. In terms of advancements, 
it aims to extend the types of data exchanged 
such as health information from wearables 
and, crucially, social care data. Lastly, the 
strategy also sketches out further steps to 
better harness health data for research, pro­
mote the application of AI technologies in 
reference to the Topol review [64], and steps 
to continue to work towards establishing a 
learning health system – thus capitalizing on 
its current and anticipated HIE capabilities 
[65], These activities reflect an integrated, 
holistic policy approach and a structured 
governance framework to integrate care 
pathways across siloed responsibilities to 
encourage health information technolo­
gy-based innovation [66].
3.2.4   Israel
HIE structures and practices in Israel have 
been closely tied to the structure of the coun­
try’s healthcare system [67]. Within their 
universal national health insurance system, 
each Israeli citizen is a member of one of the 
four not-for-profit Health Maintenance Or­
ganizations through which they receive both 
insurance and care. While the Ministry of 
Health (MoH) is responsible for overarching 
policy, regulation, planning, budgeting, etc., 
the HMOs have been relatively independent 
in the way they design their healthcare 
services. The competition among them as 
well as their integrated accountability for 
the patients across various care settings is 
said to have facilitated innovation-seeking 
strategies from the bottom-up, including the 
adoption of HIE solutions within the HMOs 
[54, 67]. The largest of the four HMOs, 
‘Clalit’ (which covers roughly 52% of the 
population and exhibits the highest degree 
of vertical integration from primary to ter­
tiary care services), was an early adopter of 
an HIE system called OFEK – a distributed 
system that enabled the retrieval of basic 
patient information from any kind of local 
EHR system through a specific interface, 
with patients automatically enrolled with an 
opt-out option [68, 69]. Although the system 
was found to create local benefits in terms of 
reduced test ordering and nearly all Israeli 
EHRs were interoperable within HMOs [70], 
information exchange outside the HMOs 
remained insufficient and patient access 
to their medical data is still rather limited 
for many citizens [6]. In light of these lim­
itations, the MoH started taking on a more 
active role to promote widespread HIE. This 
was first expressed by adopting OFEK as a 
single centralized HIE system to be used on a 
national level across all service providers by 
2014 [70, 71]. Subsequently, the MoH also 
published a digital health strategy in 2018 in 
which HIE was recognized as a foundational 
strategic element [71, 72]. Correspondingly, 
OFEK was further developed and eventually 
upgraded to a new version with more com­
prehensive and advanced functionalities, 
called EITAN. The implementation of EIT­
AN was supported by a financial incentive 
program for the adopting organizations and 
designed as an opt-out system to ensure 
widespread use [71, 73].
Most Israeli healthcare organizations 
have now adopted EITAN. Similar to its pre­
decessor OFEK, EITAN uses a decentralized 
architecture: clinical data are stored in local 
databases within the provider organizations 
based on a nationally consented clinical 
dataset. These databases operate using a 
proprietary and detailed mapping of clinical 
data elements into a semantic interopera­
bility standard, and receive their data from 
the organization’s EHR and are connected 
through a national HIE network which has 
its hub at the MoH [74]. Thus, patient data 
can be shared and accessed by authorized 
personnel in all provider organizations. 
However, due to the usage of varying HIE 
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
189
Health Information Exchange: Understanding the Policy Landscape and Future of Data Interoperability
solutions in conjunction with different local 
EHR systems over time, challenges remain 
concerning the consistent use of standards 
and terminologies [71, 75]. Furthermore, 
Itzhaki et al. recently found that many ward 
nurses, contact nurses (who are responsible 
for care coordination across providers), and 
patients are still unaware of EITAN which 
impedes its effective use [76]. Additionally, 
there is a nascent but growing community 
emphasizing the use of HL7 FHIR stan­
dards in Israel, including the MoH, which 
launched the first FHIR-based projects in 
2021 [75]. But despite these drawbacks, 
Israel’s HIE capabilities are viewed as 
rather advanced as compared to many other 
developed countries [54, 72].
Future Considerations & Strategy: The 
MoH continues to actively support the 
adoption and further development of its 
nationwide HIE solution EITAN based on a 
public-private partnership [72, 77]. Thus, lo­
cal-level HIE innovations within the HMOs 
have largely given way to more centralized 
strategic planning and execution by the MoH 
to promote coherence across health system 
silos. For example, this is currently reflected 
in efforts to improve the interoperability and 
accessibility of clinical information for ad­
vanced data analytic services by pursuing the 
widespread implementation of HL7 FHIR 
[75]. Despite this tendency for more cen­
tralized planning in many regards, the MoH 
still aims to facilitate bottom-up innovation 
based on their past successes by, for example, 
providing funding for digital health services 
such as third-party clinical decision support 
tools that utilize data from the HIE network 
[72, 78]. Going forward, it is also expected 
to aim for enhanced patient access to their 
medical data through mobile, personal health 
record solutions [71] – thereby making fur­
ther progress in realizing the paradigm shift 
towards more personalized medicine.
3.2.5   Portugal
Portugal’s national HIE strategy has gone 
through several transitions since its founda­
tion in the 1990s. If in the late 90s and early 
2000s, the Portugal eHealth ecosystem was 
recognized as being the most advanced for 
its time, i.e. being one of the first countries 
to implement nationwide unique health 
identification, it has been lacking the same 
propelling drive since the early 2000s. The 
prevalent idea until the early 2000s was 
monolithic solutions that, in theory, would 
cover most of the institutions’ Health In­
formatics necessities. However, the 2010s 
brought a different perspective to the Portu­
guese landscape. 
This happened for mainly two reasons, 
SONHO as a mandatory software and 
LIGHt (Local Interoperability Gateway for 
Healthcare). SONHO is a public admis­
sion-discharge-transfer (ADT) health infor­
mation system (HIS) and in 2013 all public 
hospitals were forced by law to migrate their 
current solutions to it [79]. This software is 
the base for registering administrative and 
demographic data and was first built in the 
early 90s. Even though it has passed through 
several iterations and improvements, the 
core is still very similar to its original one 
(based on Oracle 8). The second reason is an 
infrastructure called LIGHt which functions 
like a broker that is used to communicate 
health information from the state-provided 
software (i.e., SONHO) to third parties and is 
highly based on the HL7 version 2 standard 
[80]. This was a significant paradigm shift as 
this gateway provided the state-owned HIS 
the ability to connect with third parties. All 
this software and infrastructure is provided 
by SPMS, a state-owned enterprise, which 
is the governmental branch and the center 
of public eHealth policies, infrastructure, 
acting as regulator and HIS developer. This 
centralized top-down initiative was meant 
to enable better, faster interoperability 
progress, though it may come at the cost of 
innovation as private technology developers 
are unable to find a market in Portugal [81], 
and may explain why many large information 
technology companies do not have a signif­
icant presence in the country as Portugal’s 
health information software systems are 
based on public, state-owned systems. 
Due to the mandatory migration, virtu­
ally all public hospitals have the same basis 
for administrative data input and different 
health information systems for the clinical 
data (some public and some private). Private 
care delivery organizations are free to choose 
which health information software to use 
and now are not part of the HIE structure 
[82]. The data stored in public software is 
exchanged through the RSE (“Registo Saúde 
Eletrónico” – Portuguese for Electronic 
Health Record) [83]. From its inception, the 
RSE was designed to act as an aggregator 
of health data, with a similar structure to 
a hybrid federated approach having three 
different layers of information, ranging 
from local to shared/centralized data. In 
the middle layer, rests interoperability with 
existing systems. The catalog of data avail­
able at the moment in the RSE is difficult 
to collect and aggregate, but the high-level 
national goal is to provide access to general 
information about medication, diagnosis, 
demographic data, procedures, vaccination, 
and laboratory exams in the shared layer 
[84]. While the definition of full interoper­
ability is constantly being updated, a major 
barrier to completion is physical hardware, 
where it is estimated that the public sector 
has between 25% and 50% of the necessary 
computer equipment across care delivery and 
public health agencies [85].
Future Considerations & Strategy: The 
current focus of the MoH is applying eHealth 
efforts supporting the patients, namely tele­
medicine and personal smartphone applica­
tions. Key points from Portugal’s scene from 
2021-2022 were the telemedicine support 
for its HIS. In 2019, the Portuguese MoH 
introduced PENTS (National Strategic Tele­
health Plan), with an aim to provide access 
to telehealth across the country [86], with 
a focus on chronic illnesses [87]. Further, 
SNS24 – the personal app provided by SPMS 
has received several updates over the last 
two years, and can now be used by patients 
to access key health information due to con­
nection with RSE. Vaccines, prescriptions, 
referrals, teleconsultations, allergies, and 
sick leaves are some of the possible informa­
tion to view in the app [88]. These two points 
are defined by the national strategy for the 
Health Information Ecosystem 2020 which 
is focused on three aspects: governance and 
strategy alignment; improvement of human 
resources’ competencies and technological 
upgrades [89, 90]. Finally, Portugal faces 
several future challenges which have yet to 
be addressed in a formal way. Data security 
is a growing issue, with several hospitals 
having been attacked by ransomware hackers 
190
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
Holmgren et al
over the last few years and the strategy to re­
spond to this matter is still being formalized 
[91]. Several workgroups were created, but a 
clear guideline or approach is yet to be de­
termined. Further, patient consent processes 
remain an ongoing area of development in 
Portugal – currently, many patients engage 
in a two-step consent process where they 
consent for their inclusion and for each use 
of medical services for some features (such 
as e-prescribing), but for other features such 
as the use of HIE for clinical care by provid­
ers, implied consent (or an opt-out consent 
model) is the norm, while the patient-facing 
portals have stricter consent requirements 
[92]. Experts rated “Inadequate or incon­
sistent approaches to patient consent” as a 
major barrier to interoperability in Portugal 
in 2020 [93]. Additionally, data quality issues 
remain problematic – researchers have found 
large discrepancies in reconciling different 
electronic referral records in Portuguese hos­
pitals [94]. Keeping in mind that evidence 
generated from data is the basis of clinical 
practice, ensuring quality and accuracy 
standards is key to going further into digital 
adoption and fulfillment of national strate­
gies around the world.
4   Discussion
While deriving generalizable insights from 
the case studies of the health systems pre­
sented here is difficult, given the unique 
legislative and regulatory, policy, and health 
care delivery environments in each, our 
study contributes to our understanding of 
how policy shapes HIE adoption and use by 
identifying several commonalities across our 
five focal nations. First, successful national 
HIE requires some level of central strategic 
planning and involvement, irrespective of 
health system type. As Payne et al. noted in 
their paper comparing HIE internationally, 
“in countries that have successfully achieved 
HIE, or are on course to do so, the impetus 
came from government and the change was 
galvanized with economic incentives to 
health care providers”[7]. Despite operating 
within different payment and care delivery 
environments, both Israel and Portugal have 
more advanced HIE capabilities than the US, 
in part due to the emphasis placed on data ex­
change by a national-level policy. However, 
centralization is not a guarantee of complete 
success without adversity – the UK NHS has, 
and continues to, experienced challenges 
in their HIE strategy despite the extremely 
high level of organizational centralization 
in the UK. However, “bottom-up” innova­
tion and early adoption can spur important 
progress, such as the adoption of early HIE 
systems by Israel’s largest HMO, Clalit, 
which provided a blueprint for national 
adoption. The US may soon experience 
a similar process – despite the relatively 
“hands-off” nature of their early HIE strat­
egy, several pockets of successful HIE did 
develop, which serve as a model for a new 
strategy following the 21st Century Cures 
Act focusing on APIs, FHIR standards, and 
penalties for information blocking.
The variation in HIE policy and success 
across varying nations reflects the multi­
ple challenges of HIE, including aligning 
financial incentives for adoption and use, 
technical challenges, governance choices, 
and integration of outside data into clinical 
workflows. If the only serious impediment 
to broad interoperability were financial 
incentives, the UK NHS would have 
had a simple time achieving robust HIE. 
Similarly, while HIE is far from robust 
in the US, it is likely more advanced than 
the German system despite featuring an 
even more decentralized, competitive, 
and market-oriented care delivery system. 
Socio-technical challenges around setting 
standards, generating awareness of the HIE 
and encouraging adoption without burden­
ing clinician and patient users, and building 
governance models with broad acceptance 
that are flexible enough to adapt to changing 
technological and social needs are common 
across our case study nations.
While there is no clear “best” overarching 
HIE strategy, multiple approaches may be 
effective in facilitating robust interoperable 
data exchange. For example, it may be that 
a “middle-out” system, defined by Price et 
al. as centralized leadership with strong pub­
lic-private collaboration and more local con­
trol by individual care delivery organizations 
similar to the current strategy in the UK, may 
provide a balanced approach to these chal­
lenges, preserving local innovation around 
issues like workflow integration by private 
vendors and health care organizations while 
setting national-level interoperability incen­
tives, standards, and governance frameworks 
[55]. Similarly, heavily centralized approach­
es may be successful, as Israel’s increasing 
centralization has shown. However, the early 
experience of the US during the HITECH 
era illustrates the difficulty of achieving 
broad, robust interoperability with a heavily 
decentralized policy framework – even with 
significant effort to build EHR infrastructure 
and align financial incentives. Each system 
must recognize the importance and centrality 
of the patients – from giving them the final 
say in the ability to opt-out of data sharing 
such as in Israel to enabling them to access 
all their clinical data in the US, any national 
HIE strategy must work to ensure patients’ 
changing needs are being met. Policymakers 
may wish to focus on creating integrated care 
structures that maximize incentives to share 
data while simultaneously ensuring there 
is a national-level interoperability strategy 
that makes data exchange a priority, with 
prescriptive guidance around standards and 
governance. At the same time, these strate­
gies need to be adaptable to an ever-chang­
ing world, and researchers should carefully 
monitor and evaluate HIE progress to inform 
policymakers and allow them to be flexible in 
their approach. Finally, ensuring awareness 
among users (e.g. clinicians, patients, payers, 
public health agencies, etc.) and supporting 
actual use of HIE is critical to move from 
encouraging building interoperable data 
exchange to maximizing the potential of HIE 
to improve health and care delivery. 
Directions for Future Study, Research and 
Policy Implications: While there is a signif­
icant and growing literature, there are still 
many unknowns with respect to HIE. While 
we provide speculation above regarding how 
different policy frameworks have influenced 
the development of HIE in five nations, in 
many dimensions of HIE we are unable to 
make direct cross-country comparisons due 
to a lack of data or published research. Stan­
dardized measures of HIE in terms of data 
exchanged, semantic interoperability, use by 
frontline clinicians are often not available at 
the national-level, or only available in aggre­
gate form or with organization-level survey 
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
191
Health Information Exchange: Understanding the Policy Landscape and Future of Data Interoperability
measures that do not provide granular details 
of use. Our analysis was limited to holistic, 
qualitative evaluations of HIE maturity, 
centralization, and incentives due to this lack 
of broad, comparable empirical measures, 
and we supplemented what literature exists 
with small and single-site studies, policy 
briefs, and grey literature. To remedy this, 
we provide a non-exhaustive list of areas for 
additional future research:
•	 Measurement: Many measures of HIE fo­
cus on organization-level adoption, rather 
than evaluating actual real-world use (e.g., 
how often data from HIE is used in care de­
livery, or aggregated into population-level 
data by public health agencies), especially 
in studies measuring at a national-level [33, 
95]. More granular measurement, includ­
ing measuring volume of outside records 
exchanged, viewed, and their influence on 
the patient and clinician, is the next frontier 
of HIE measurement. Finally, measuring 
whether and how clinicians actually use 
that data when delivering care is critical to 
improving HIE policy at a national level 
and implementation at a local level.
•	 Impact: While early modeling studies 
have predicted significant cost reductions 
from HIE [3], many empirical studies have 
found it difficult to identify broad gains 
in either quality or cost [96]. Additional 
research, especially studies with robust 
designs for causal inference, is important 
to identify the impact of HIE on quality, 
costs, and the patient experience [97].
•	 Workflow: Given growing concerns over 
clinician EHR work [98, 99], especially 
in the US [100], it is critical for HIE to 
present outside records within existing 
workflows without exacerbating burden. 
Early studies show integrating HIE into the 
standard patient history screen greatly in­
creased clinician views of outside records 
[101], future research should evaluate how 
and when to present information from var­
ious sources (e.g., other providers; patient 
reported data; remote monitoring devices) 
to clinicians across various clinical scenar­
ios and settings (e.g., inpatient, outpatient, 
emergency; post-acute care; community 
health providers).
•	 Population Health and HIE as “Data 
Utility”: While HIE has always held great 
potential as a data aggregation source 
to fuel population-level analytics, the 
COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated the 
importance of this information. Several 
efforts are underway to conceptualize 
HIEs more broadly as a “data utility”, in­
cluding using HIE data for more accurate 
clinical quality measurement, data ag­
gregation for research, and public health 
analytics [102, 103]. While still a nascent 
field, following the development of these 
next-generation efforts and evaluating 
their effectiveness is critical to guide the 
next phase of HIE. 
HIE research is at an important inflection 
point – moving past structural measures of 
adoption to evaluating volume and impact at 
scale, best practices for integration of data 
into clinical workflows across a range of sce­
narios and broadening the spectrum of HIE 
use cases. Scientific research plays a critical 
role in the continuous evaluation of HIE to 
inform the healthcare eco-system (including 
patients, policymakers and practitioners) of 
the value of data sharing and avoid potential 
pitfalls and unintended consequences. 
5   Conclusion
Following the digitization of health care 
delivery, HIE and data interoperability has 
become increasingly important for delivering 
high quality care. HIE can reduce costs and 
duplicative utilization, improve the patient 
experience, and empower patients with 
access to their data, and ensure clinicians 
have access to all relevant information for 
their patients at the point of care, no matter 
where that data was generated. While im­
plementing robust national HIE has been 
a challenge, our case studies highlighting 
different approaches from five nations sug­
gest some generalizable policy frameworks 
that balance centralized decision-making 
around standards and governance but allow 
for local innovation in technical capability 
and workflow integration. Future research on 
HIE should include more detailed measure­
ment of data exchange and use, the impact of 
interoperability on patients and care delivery 
organizations and assessing new frontiers of 
using HIE for public and population health. 
References
1.	
Adler-Milstein J, Jha AK. HITECH Act 
drove large gains in hospital electronic 
health record adoption. Health Aff (Mill­
wood)2017;36(8):1416–22. doi: 10.1377/
hlthaff.2016.1651.
2.	
Blumenthal D. Stimulating the Adoption of 
Health Information Technology. N Engl J 
Med 2009;360(15):14779. doi: 10.1056/NE­
JMp0901592.
3.	
Walker J, Pan E, Johnston D, Adler-Milstein J, 
Bates DW, Middleton B. The value of Health 
care information exchange and interoperability. 
Health Aff (Millwood) 2005;Suppl Web Exclu­
sives:W5-10-W5-18. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.w5.10.
4.	
Kyle MA, Frakt AB. Patient administrative bur­
den in the US health care system. Health Serv 
Res 2012;56(5):755–65. doi: 10.1111/1475-
6773.13861.
5.	
Holmgren AJ, Apathy NC, Adler-Milstein J. Bar­
riers to Hospital Electronic Public Health Report­
ing and Implications for the COVID-19 Pandem­
ic. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2020;27(8):1306-9. 
doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa112.
6.	
Ammenwerth E, Duftschmid G, Al-Hamdan Z, 
Bawadi H, Cheung NT, Cho K-H, et al. Interna­
tional Comparison of Six Basic eHealth Indica­
tors Across 14 Countries: An eHealth Bench­
marking Study. Methods Inf Med 2020;59(S 
02):e46–e63. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1715796.
7.	
Payne JH, Lovis C, Gutteridge C, Pagliari C, 
Natarajan S, Yong C, et al. Status of health infor­
mation exchange: a comparison of six countries. 
J Glob Health 2019;9(2):0204279. doi: 10.7189/
jogh.09.020427.
8.	
Adler-Milstein J, Pfeifer E. Information Block­
ing: Is It Occurring and What Policy Strategies 
Can Address It? Milbank Q 2017;95(1):117–35. 
doi: 10.1111/1468-0009.12247.
9.	
Downing K, Mason J. ONC Targets Information 
Blocking. J AHIMA 2015;86(7):36–8.
10.	 Liyanage H, Krause P, de Lusignan S. Using 
ontologies to improve semantic interoperability 
in health data. J Innov Health Inform 2015;22(2). 
doi: 10.14236/jhi.v22i2.159.
11.	 de Mello BH, Rigo SJ, da Costa CA, da Rosa 
Righi R, Donida B, Rosecler Bez M, et al. 
Semantic interoperability in health records 
standards: a systematic literature review. Health 
Technol (Berl) 2022;12(2):255–72. doi: 10.1007/
s12553-022-00639-w.
12.	 Akhlaq A, Sheikh A, Pagliari C. Defining 
health information exchange: scoping review 
of published definitions. J Innov Health Inform 
2017;23(4) doi: 10.14236/jhi.v23i4.838.
13.	 Sarkar N. Transforming Health Data to Action­
able Information: Recent Progress and Future 
Opportunities in Health Information Exchange. 
Yearb Med Inform 2022;31:203–14. doi: 
10.1055/s-0042-1742519.
14.	 Dixon BE, Holmgren AJ, Adler-Milstein J, 
Grannis SJ. Health Information Exchange and 
Interoperability. In: Finnell JT, Dixon BE, 
editors. Clinical Informatics Study Guide: 
Text and Review. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing; 2022. p. 203–19. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-030-93765-2_14.
192
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
Holmgren et al
15.	 Adler-Milstein J, Bates DW, Jha AK. A Survey of 
Health Information Exchange Organizations in 
the United States: Implications for Meaningful 
Use. Ann Intern Med 2011;154(10):666–71. doi: 
10.1059/0003-4819-154-10-201105170-00006.
16.	 Adler-Milstein J, Garg A, Zhao W, Patel V. 
A Survey Of Health Information Exchange 
Organizations In Advance Of A Nationwide 
Connectivity Framework. Health Aff (Mill­
wood) 2012;40(5):736–44. doi: 10.1377/
hlthaff.2020.01497.
17.	 Gematik, Pressemitteilung | Fakten zur Dig­
italisierung: TI-Atlas 2022 veröffentlicht | 
gematik, Oct. 18, 2022. [available at: https://
www.gematik.de/presse/pressemitteilung-fak­
ten-zur-digitalisierung-ti-atlas-2022-veroeffen­
tlicht; accessed Dec. 15, 2022].
18.	 Dehling T, Sunyaev A. German Health IT Infra­
structure: A Large-Scale Network Alleviating 
Challenges in Health IT Development. Working 
Paper, University of Cologne, May 2014. doi: 
10.13140/RG.2.1.3315.8566.
19. Holmgren A, Adler-Milstein J. Health Informa­
tion Exchange in US Hospitals: The Current 
Landscape and a Path to Improved Information 
Sharing. J Hosp Med 2017;12(3):193. doi: 
10.12788/jhm.2704.
20.	 Blumenthal D. Launching HITECH. N Engl 
J Med 2010;362(5):382–5. doi: 10.1056/NE­
JMp0912825.
21.	 Apathy NC, Holmgren AJ, Adler-Milstein J. A 
decade post-HITECH: Critical access hospitals 
have electronic health records but struggle to 
keep up with other advanced functions. J Am 
Med Inform Assoc 2012;28(9):1947-54. doi: 
10.1093/jamia/ocab102.
22.	 2020 Medicare Promoting Interoperability 
Program Scoring Methodology Fact Sheet, 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 
2020. [Available at: https://www.cms.gov/files/
document/scoring-methodology-fact-sheet.pdf; 
accessed Mar. 15, 2023].
23.	 Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization 
Act of 2015 (MACRA). [Available at: https://
www.congress.gov/114/plaws/publ10/PLAW-
114publ10.pdf; accessed Mar. 29, 2023].
24.	 Grossman JM, Kushner KL, November EA. 
Creating sustainable local health information 
exchanges: can barriers to stakeholder partici­
pation be overcome? Res Brief 2008;2:1-12.
25.	 Charles D, Swain M, Patel V. Interoperability 
among U.S. Non-federal Acute Care Hospitals, 
2014. ONC Data Brief 2015;25:10.
26.	 Office of the National Coordinator for Health In­
formation Technology. 2022 Report to Congress: 
Update on the Access, Exchange, and Use of 
Electronic Health Information, 2022. [Available 
at: https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/
page/2023-02/2022_ONC_Report_to_Congress.
pdf; accessed Mar. 29, 2023].
27.	 Holmgren AJ, Everson J, Adler-Milstein J. 
Association of Hospital Interoperable Data 
Sharing With Alternative Payment Mod­
el Participation. JAMA Health Forum 
2002;3(2):e215199–e215199. doi: 10.1001/
jamahealthforum.2021.5199.
28.	 Madhavan S, Bastarache L, Brown JS, Butte AJ, 
Dorr DA, Embi PJ, et al. Use of electronic health 
records to support a public health response to 
the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States: a 
perspective from 15 academic medical centers. 
J Am Med Inform Assoc 2012;28(2):393–401. 
doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa287.
29.	 Reeves JJ, Pageler NM, Wick EC, Melton GB, 
Gamaliel Tan Y-H, Clay BJ, et al. The Clinical 
Information Systems Response to the COVID-19 
Pandemic. Yearb Med Inform 2012;30:105–25. 
doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1726513.
30.	 Holmgren AJ, Patel V, Charles D, Adler-Mil­
stein J. US Hospital Engagement in Core 
Domains of Interoperability. Am J Manag Care 
2016;22(12):e395–e402.
31.	 Holmgren AJ, Patel V, Adler-Milstein J. Progress 
In Interoperability: Measuring US Hospitals’ 
Engagement In Sharing Patient Data. Health Aff 
(Millwood) 2017;36(10):1820–7. doi: 10.1377/
hlthaff.2017.0546.
32.	 Apath, NC, Vest JR, Adler-Milstein J, Blackburn 
J, Dixon, BE, Harle CA. Practice and market 
factors associated with provider volume of 
health information exchange. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc 2021;28(7):1451–60. doi: 10.1093/jamia/
ocab024.
33.	 Patel V, Pylypchuk Y, Parasrampuria S, Kachay L. 
Interoperability among Office-Based Physicians 
in 2015 and 2017. ONC Data Brief 2019;47:12.
34.	 Apathy NC, Holmgren AJ. Opt-in consent 
policies: potential barriers to hospital health 
information exchange. Am J Manag Care 
2020;26(1):e14.
35.	 Bronsoler A, Doyle J, Schmit C, Van Reenen J. 
The Role of State Policy in Fostering Health In­
formation Exchange in the United States. NEJM 
Catal Innov Care Deliv 2023;4(1). doi: 10.1056/
CAT.22.0302.
36.	 Winden T, Boland L, Frey N, Satterlee P, Hokan­
son J. Care everywhere, a point-to-point HIE 
tool: Utilization and impact on patient care in 
the ED. Appl Clin Inform 2014;5(2):388–401. 
doi: 10.4338/ACI-2013-12-RA-0100.
37.	 Everson J, Butler E. Hospital adoption of multi­
ple health information exchange approaches and 
information accessibility. J Am Med Inform As­
soc:27(4):577–83. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa003.
38.	 Cross DA, Adler-Milstein J. Investing in 
Post-Acute Care Transitions: Electronic In­
formation Exchange Between Hospitals and 
Long-Term Care Facilities. J Am Med Dir 
Assoc 2017;18(1):30–4. doi: 10.1016/j.jam­
da.2016.07.024.
39.	 Lin SC, Hollingsworth JM, Adler-Milstein J. 
Alternative Payment Models and Hospital En­
gagement in Health Information Exchange. Am 
J Manag Care 2019;25(1):e1–e6.
40.	 Apathy NC, Holmgren AJ, Werner RM. Growth 
in health information exchange with ACO market 
penetration. Am J Manag Care 2022;28(1):e7–
e13. doi: 10.37765/ajmc.2022.88815.
41.	 Porreca D, Yaraghi N. The Impact of Population 
Health Analytics on Health Care Quality and 
Efficacy Among CPC+ Participants. Milbank 
Memorial Fund; 2022. [Available at: https://
www.milbank.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/
WNY_Report2.pdf; accessed Mar. 29, 2023].
42.	 About ONC’s Cures Act Final Rule. [Available 
at: https://www.healthit.gov/curesrule/overview/
about-oncs-cures-act-final-rule; accessed Mar. 
15, 2023].
43.	 Trusted Exchange Framework and Common 
Agreement | HealthIT.gov, Office of the National 
Coordinator for Health Information Technology, 
May 26, 2020. [Avaialable at: https://www.
healthit.gov/topic/interoperability/trusted-ex­
change-framework-and-common-agreement; 
accessed Mar. 15, 2023].
44.	 ONC debuts first cohort of qualified networks 
in TEFCA, including Epic, eHealth Exchange, 
Healthcare Dive. [Available at: https://www.
healthcaredive.com/news/onc-first-cohort-of-
qualified-networks-tefca-epic/642654/; accessed 
Feb. 27, 2023].
45.	 Office of the National Coordinator for Health 
Information Technology, Trusted Exchange 
Framework and Common Agreement (TEFCA) 
| HealthIT.gov, HealthIT.gov. [Available at: 
https://www.healthit.gov/topic/interoperability/
policy/trusted-exchange-framework-and-com­
mon-agreement-tefca; accessed Dec. 15, 2022].
46.	 Bogumil-Uçan S, Klenk T. Varieties of health 
care digitalization: Comparing advocacy coa­
litions in Austria and Germany. Rev Policy Res 
2021;38(4):478–503. doi: 10.1111/ropr.12435.
47.	 Müller J, Ullrich C, Poss-Doering R. Beyond 
Known Barriers—Assessing Physician Per­
spectives and Attitudes Toward Introducing 
Open Health Records in Germany: Qualitative 
Study. J Particip Med 2020;12(4):e19093. doi: 
10.2196/19093.
48.	 Naumann L, Babitsch B, Hübner UH. eHealth 
policy processes from the stakeholders’ view­
point: A qualitative comparison between Austria, 
Switzerland and Germany. Health Policy 
Technol 2021;10(2):100505. doi: 10.1016/j.
hlpt.2021.100505.
49.	 Naumann L, Esdar M, Ammenwerth E, Baum­
berger D, Hübner U. Same Goals, Yet Different 
Outcomes: Analysing the Current State of 
eHealth Adoption and Policies in Austria, Ger­
many, and Switzerland Using a Mixed Methods 
Approach. MEDINFO 2019; 2019. p. 1012–6. 
doi: 10.3233/SHTI190377.
50.	 Pohlmann S, Kunz A, Ose,D, Winkler EC, Brand­
ner A, Poss-Doering R, et al. Digitalizing Health 
Services by Implementing a Personal Electronic 
Health Record in Germany: Qualitative Analysis 
of Fundamental Prerequisites From the Perspec­
tive of Selected Experts, J Med Internet Res 2020 
Jan 29;22(1):e15102. doi: 10.2196/15102.
51.	 EHR and PHR: digital records in the German 
healthcare system, Mar. 18, 2019. [Available 
at: https://www.gesundheitsindustrie-bw.de/
en/article/news/ehr-and-phr-digital-records-
in-the-german-healthcare-system; accessed 
Feb. 28, 2023].
52.	 Amelung V, Angelkorte M, Augurzky B, Brauer 
R, Freigang F, Fritzsche F, et al. Ergebnisse der 
ersten nationalen Reifegradmessung deutscher 
Krankenhäuser. DigitalRadar 2022;148. [Avail­
able at: https://www.bundesgesundheitsmin­
isterium.de/service/publikationen/details/
digitalradar-zwischenbericht.html; accessed 
Mar. 29, 2023].
53.	 Albrecht M, Otten M, Sander M, Temizdemir E, 
Wichtrup W. PraxisBarometer Digitalisierung 
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
193
Health Information Exchange: Understanding the Policy Landscape and Future of Data Interoperability
2020. Stand und Perspektiven der Digitalisierung 
in der vertragsärztlichen und -psychotherapeu­
tischen Versorgung; 2020. [Available at: https://
www.iges.com/sites/igesgroup/iges.de/myzms/
content/e6/e1621/e10211/e24893/e26423/
e26424/e26426/attr_objs26428/IGES_KBV_
Digitalbaromenter_2020_ger.pdf; accessed Mar. 
29, 2023]. 
54.	 Thiel R, Deimel L, Schmidtmann D, Pi­
esche K, Hüsing T, Rennoch J, et al. Gesund­
heitssystem-Vergleich Fokus Digitalisierung. # 
SmartHealthSystems Digitalisierungsstrategien 
im internationalen Vergleich; 2018. [Avail­
able at: https://www.bertelsmann-stiftung.de/
fileadmin/files/Projekte/Der_digitale_Patient/
VV_SHS-Gesamtstudie_dt.pdf; accessed Mar. 
29, 2023].
55.	 Price C, Green W, Suhomlinova O. Twenty-five 
years of national health IT: exploring strategy, 
structure, and systems in the English NHS. J 
Am Med Inform Assoc 2019;26(3):188–97. doi: 
10.1093/jamia/ocy162.
56.	 NHS England - Transformation Directorate. 
Consent and confidential patient information; 
Feb. 10, 2023. [Available at: https://transform.en­
gland.nhs.uk/information-governance/guidance/
consent-and-confidential-patient-information/; 
accessed Feb. 27, 2023].
57.	 Justinia T. The UK’s National Programme for IT: 
Why was it dismantled? Health Serv Manage Res 
2017;30(1):2–9. doi: 10.1177/0951484816662492.
58.	 Warren LR, Clarke J, Arora S, Darzi A. Im­
proving data sharing between acute hospitals in 
England: an overview of health record system 
distribution and retrospective observational 
analysis of inter-hospital transitions of care. 
BMJ Open 2019;9(12):e031637. doi: 10.1136/
bmjopen-2019-031637.
59.	 NHS England  Interoperability. [Available at: 
https://www.england.nhs.uk/digitaltechnology/
connecteddigitalsystems/interoperability/; ac­
cessed Feb. 28, 2023].
60.	 NHS England - Transformation Directorate. In­
formation Governance Framework: Shared Care 
Records; Feb. 02, 2022. [Available at: https://
transform.england.nhs.uk/information-gover­
nance/guidance/summary-of-information-gover­
nance-framework-shared-care-records/; accessed 
Dec. 30, 2022].
61.	 Zhang J, Sood H, Harrison OT, Horner B, 
Sharma N, Budhdeo S. Interoperability in NHS 
hospitals must be improved: the Care Quality 
Commission should be a key actor in this 
process. J R Soc Med 2020;113(3):101–4. doi: 
10.1177/0141076819894664.
62.	 Watkinson F, Dharmayat KI, Mastellos N. A 
mixed-method service evaluation of health 
information exchange in England: technology 
acceptance and barriers and facilitators to adop­
tion. BMC Health Serv Res 2012;21(1):737. doi: 
10.1186/s12913-021-06771-z.
63.	 Wise J. New data strategy for England aims to 
rebuild public trust. BMJ 2022;377:o1455. doi: 
10.1136/bmj.o1455.
64.	 Topol E. The topol review. Preparing the health­
care workforce to deliver the digital future; Feb 
2019. p. 1–48.
65.	 Scobie S, Castle-Clarke S. Implementing learn­
ing health systems in the UK NHS: Policy actions 
to improve collaboration and transparency and 
support innovation and better use of analytics. 
Learn Health Syst 2020;4(1):e10209. doi: 
10.1002/lrh2.10209.
66.	 Marjanovic S, Altenhofer M, Hocking L, Chat­
away J, Ling T. Innovating for improved health­
care: Sociotechnical and innovation systems 
perspectives and lessons from the NHS. Sci 
Public Policy 2020;47(2):283–97. doi: 10.1093/
scipol/scaa005.
67.	 Frankel M, Chinitz D, Salzberg CA, Reichman 
K. Sustainable health information exchanges: the 
role of institutional factors. Isr J Health Policy 
Res 2013;2(1):21. doi: 10.1186/2045-4015-2-21.
68.	 Flaks-Manov N, Shadmi E, Hoshen M, Balicer 
RD. Health information exchange systems and 
length of stay in readmissions to a different 
hospital. J Hosp Med 2016;11(6):401–6. doi: 
10.1002/jhm.2535.
69.	 Politi L, Codish S, Sagy I, Fink L. Balancing 
volume and duration of information consumption 
by physicians: The case of health information 
exchange in critical care. J Biomed Inform 2017 
Jul;71:1–15. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2017.05.007.
70.	 Nirel N, Rosen B, Sharon A, Blondheim O, Sherf 
M, Cohen AD. OFEK virtual medical records: an 
evaluation of an integrated hospital-community 
system. Harefuah 2011 Feb;150(2):72–8, 209.
71.	 Gilboa A. The Implementation of a National 
Health Information Exchange Platform in Israel. 
Inter-American Development Bank; May 2022. 
doi: 10.18235/0004272.
72.	 Colombo F, Oderkirk J, Slawomirski L. Health 
Information Systems, Electronic Medical 
Records, and Big Data in Global Healthcare: 
Progress and Challenges in OECD Countries. 
In: Haring R, Kickbusch I, Ganten D, Moeti 
M, editors. Handbook of Global Health. Cham: 
Springer International Publishing; 2020. p. 1–31. 
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-05325-3_71-1.
73.	 State of Israel Ministry of Health. Health Infor­
mation Exchange. [Available at: https://www.
health.gov.il/English/About/projects/shared_
medical_info/Pages/default.asp; accessed Dec. 
15, 2022].
74.	 Zimlichman E. Israel: A Nationwide Health 
Information Exchange Program in Israel: A 
Unique Case Study. In: Health Systems Im­
provement Across the Globe. CRC Press; 2018.
75.	 World Health Organization, Israel. Advancing In­
teroperability and Data Sharing in the Health Sys­
tem; Jan. 2022. [Available at: https://www.euro.
who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/509597/
vignette-interoperability-data-sharing-Israel.pdf; 
accessed Feb. 27, 2023].
76.	 Itzhaki M, Koren E, Abu Hussein K, Levy L, 
Gantz I, Barnoy S. Use of Health Informa­
tion Exchange in the Continuity of Care as 
Viewed by Patients and Nurses: A Cross-Sec­
tional Study. CIN Comput Inform Nurs 2020 
Mar;:10.1097/CIN.0000000000000861. doi: 
10.1097/CIN.0000000000000861.
77.	 Balicer R, Shadmi E, Manor O, Leventer-Roberts 
M. Israel: Structural and Functional Integration 
at the Israeli Healthcare System. In: Amelung V, 
Stein V, Suter E, Goodwin N, Nolte E, Balicer 
R, editors. Handbook Integrated Care. Cham: 
Springer International Publishing; 2021. p. 
1055–63. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-69262-9_62.
78.	 Ben-David R. Israel approves 19 programs for 
$30 million digital health initiative. The Times 
of Israel; May 30, 2022. [Available at: https://
www.timesofisrael.com/israel-approves-19-pro­
grams-for-30-million-digital-health-initiative/; 
accessed Dec. 15, 2022].
79.	 Dispatch n.o 182/2013 of Ministry of Health, 
182; Sep. 2013. [Available at: https://dre.pt/
dre/detalhe/despacho/12071-2013-2529406; 
accessed Dec. 15, 2022].
80.	 Interoperabilidade Técnica: LIGHt; PNB; NCP, 
SPMS, 2017. [Available at: https://www.spms.
min-saude.pt/2017/06/interoperabilidade-tecni­
ca-light-pnb-ncp/; accessed Dec. 15, 2022].
81.	 Catan G, Espanha R, Mendes RV, Toren O, 
Chinitz D. Health information technology imple­
mentation - impacts and policy considerations: 
a comparison between Israel and Portugal. Isr 
J Health Policy Res 2015 Aug;4(1):41. doi: 
10.1186/s13584-015-0040-9.
82.	 Mendonça SR. The roadmap to healthcare 
digitalization: factors that affect the Portuguese 
approach to ehealth; 2022. [Available at: https://
run.unl.pt/handle/10362/144871; accessed Dec. 
14, 2022].
83.	 ACSS, RSE – Registo de Saúde Electrónico – 
R2A: Orientações para Especificação Funcional 
e Técnica do Sistema de RSE, 2009. [Avaialable 
at: https://www.essnortecvp.pt/upload/files/
R2A_Orientacoes_FuncTec_v3.pdf; accessed 
Dec. 15, 2022].
84.	 Registo de Saúde Eletrónico, SPMS. [Available 
at: https://www.spms.min-saude.pt/2020/07/
registo-de-saude-eletronico/; accessed Dec. 
15, 2022].
85.	 Simões JA, Augusto GF, Fronteira I, Hernán­
dez-Quevedo C. Portugal: health system review. 
Health Syst Transit 2011;19(2):1-184.
86.	 Martins H, Monteiro M, Loureiro P, Cortes M. 
SPMS - Serviços Partilhados do Ministério da 
Saúde. E.P.E. Centro Nacional de TeleSaúde 
Plano Estratégico Nacional para a Telessaúde 
2019-2022, 201. [Available at: https://www.
spms.min-saude.pt/; accessed Mar. 29, 2023].
87.	 Canhão H. Portugal in the e-health path. EIT 
Health 2020 Feb 28. [Available at: https://
eithealth.eu/news-article/portugal-launches-its-
national-telehealth-as-the-first-country-in-the-
world/; accessed Dec. 15, 2022].
88.	 SPMS. Aplicação móvel SNS 24, 2022. 
[Available at: https://www.sns24.gov.pt/guia/
utilizar-a-aplicacao-movel-sns-24/; accessed 
Dec. 15, 2022].
89.	 Resolução do Conselho de Ministros n.o 
62/2016 | DRE,” 67, Oct. 2016. [Available at: 
https://dre.pt/dre/detalhe/resolucao-consel­
ho-ministros/62-2016-75542124; accessed Dec. 
15, 2022].
90.	 SPMS. ENESIS 2020 – 2022; 2019. [Available 
at: https://www.spms.min-saude.pt/wp-content/
uploads/2019/10/ENESIS2022_VersaoPara­
ConsultaPublicaOut2019.pdf; accessed Dec. 
15, 2022].
91.	 Portugal: Cyberattack on Hospital do Divi­
no Espírito Santo Impacting Notification of 
COVID-19 Test Results; 2021 Jun 28. [Available 
194
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2023
Holmgren et al
at: https://www.databreaches.net/portugal-cyber­
attack-on-hospital-do-divino-espirito-santo-im­
pacting-notification-of-covid-19-test-results/; 
accessed Jan. 02, 2023].
92.	 Gonçalves ME, Raimundo J. Over Troubled 
Water: E-Health Platforms and the Protec­
tion of Personal Data: The Case of Portugal. 
Port J Public Health 2017;35(1):52–66. doi: 
10.1159/000477650.
93.	 Rucker D, Hasan A, Lewis L, Tao D. GDHP-Ad­
vancing Interoperability Together Globally. 
Global Digital Health Partnership, Sydney, 
Australia. GDHP White Paper on Interoperability 
2020 Jul. [Available at: https://www.healthit.
gov/sites/default/files/page/2021-01/GDHP-Ad­
vancing%20Interoperability%20Together%20
Globally.pdf; accessed Feb. 28, 2023].
94.	 Vasco Santos J, Martins FS, Lopes F, Souza 
J, Freitas A. Discharge status of the patient: 
evaluating hospital data quality with a focus on 
long-term and palliative care patient data. Health 
Inf Manag J 2021 Nov30;18333583211054160. 
doi: 10.1177/18333583211054161.
95.	 Savage M, Neinstein A, Adler-Milstein J. 
Measure The Impact Of The ONC’s New In­
teroperability Rules Now. Health Affairs Blog; 
2020 Jul 7.
96.	 Rahurkar S, Vest JR, Menachemi N. Despite 
The Spread Of Health Information Exchange. 
There Is Little Evidence Of Its Impact On Cost, 
Use, And Quality Of Care. Health Aff (Mill­
wood) 2015 Mar;34(3):477–83. doi: 10.1377/
hlthaff.2014.0729.
97.	 Menachemi N, Rahurkar S, Harle CA, Vest JR. 
The benefits of health information exchange: an 
updated systematic review. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc 2018 Sep;25(9):1259–65. doi: 10.1093/
jamia/ocy035.
98.	 Adler-Milstein J, Zhao W, Willard-Grace R, Knox 
M, Grumbac, K. Electronic health records and 
burnout: Time spent on the electronic health re­
cord after hours and message volume associated 
with exhaustion but not with cynicism among 
primary care clinicians. J Am Med Inform Assoc 
2020;27(4):531–8. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz220.
99.	 Overhage JM, McCallie D. Physician Time Spent 
Using the Electronic Health Record During 
Outpatient Encounters: A Descriptive Study. 
Ann Intern Med 2020 Feb 4;172(3):169-74. doi: 
10.7326/M18-3684.
100.	 Holmgren AJ, Downing NL, Bates DW, Shanafelt 
TD, Milstein A, Sharp CD, et al. Assessment of 
Electronic Health Record Use Between US and 
Non-US Health Systems. JAMA Intern Med 
2021 Feb 1;181(2):251-9. doi: 10.1001/jamain­
ternmed.2020.7071.
101.	 Adler-Milstein J, Wang MD. The impact of 
transitioning from availability of outside records 
within electronic health records to integration 
of local and outside records within electronic 
health records. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2020 
Apr;27(4):606–12. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa006.
102.	 D’Amore JD, McCrary LK, Denson J, Li C, Vi­
tale CJ, Tokachichu P, et al. Clinical data sharing 
improves quality measurement and patient safety. 
J Am Med Inform Assoc 2021 Jul14;28(7):1534–
42. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocab039.
103.	 Indiana Network for Population Health focuses 
on social determinants of health, EurekAlert! 
[Available at: https://www.eurekalert.org/
news-releases/653368; accessed Dec. 15, 2022].
104.	 Esdar M, J. Hüsers J, Weiß JP, Rauch J, Hübner U. 
Diffusion dynamics of electronic health records: 
A longitudinal observational study comparing 
data from hospitals in Germany and the United 
States. Int J Med Inform 2019 Nov;131:103952. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.103952.
105.	 Nohl-Deryk P, Brinkmann JK, Gerlach FM, 
Schreyögg J, Achelrod D. [Barriers to Digital­
isation of Healthcare in Germany: A Survey 
of Experts], Gesundheitswesen Bundesverb. 
Arzte Offentlichen Gesundheitsdienstes Ger 
2018 Nov;80(11):939–45. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-
121010.
106.	 Payne TH, Detmer DE, Wyatt JC, Buchan IE. Na­
tional-scale clinical information exchange in the 
United Kingdom: lessons for the United States. 
J Am Med Inform Assoc 2011;18(1):91–8. doi: 
10.1136/jamia.2010.005611.
107.	 Warren L, Clarke J, Darzi A. Measuring the Scale 
of Hospital Health Record System Fragmentation 
in England. Health Serv Res 2020;55(S1):43–4. 
doi: 10.1111/1475-6773.13386.
108.	 NHS. A plan for digital health and social care. 
National Health Service; Jun. 2022. [Available 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publica­
tions/a-plan-for-digital-health-and-social-care/a-
plan-for-digital-health-and-social-care; accessed 
Feb. 28, 2023].
109.	 Lejbkowicz I, Denekamp Y, Reis S, Goldenberg 
D. Electronic medical record systems in Israel’s 
public hospitals. Isr Med Assoc J IMAJ 2004 
Oct;6(10):583–7.
110.	 Heart T, O’Reilly P, Sammon D, O’Donoghue J. 
Bottom‐up or top‐down? A comparative analysis 
of electronic health record diffusion in Ireland and 
Israel. J Syst Inf Technol 2009 Jan;11(3):244–68. 
doi: 10.1108/13287260910983623.
111.	 Prey JE, Polubriaginof F, Kuperman JG, Tiase V, 
Collins SA, Vawdrey DK. International perspec­
tives on sharing clinical data with patients. Int J 
Med Inform 2016 Feb;86:135–41. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijmedinf.2015.11.007.
112.	 Hübner UH, Wilson GM, Morawski TS, Ball MJ. 
Nursing Informatics: A Health Informatics, In­
terprofessional and Global Perspective. Springer 
Nature; 2022. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-91237-6.
113.	 Vest JR. Health information exchange: national 
and international approaches. Adv Health Care 
Manag 2012;12:3–24. doi: 10.1108/s1474-
8231(2012)0000012005.
114 	 Grenha Teixeira J, de Pinho NF, Patrício L. Bring­
ing service design to the development of health 
information systems: The case of the Portuguese 
national electronic health record. Int J Med Inf 
Inform 2019 Dec;132:103942. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijmedinf.2019.08.002.
Correspondence to:
A Jay Holmgren, PhD MHI
10 Koret Way, Office 327A
San Francisco, CA 94131
USA
Tel: +1 517 896 0614
E-mail: a.holmgren@ucsf.edu
