Health Affairs Scholar, 2025, 3(7), qxaf133 
https://doi.org/10.1093/haschl/qxaf133
Advance access publication: June 27, 2025                                                                                                               
Research Article
Assessing the value of health information exchange 
organizations to hospital interoperability
Chelsea Richwine*
, Catherine Strawley
, Wei Chang
, Jordan Everson
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, 330 C St. 7th Floor, Washington, 
DC 20201, United States
*Corresponding author: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, 330 C St. 7th Floor, Washington, 
DC 20201, United States. Email: chelsea.richwine@hhs.gov
Abstract
Introduction: Various federal efforts have supported the development of local, regional, and state health information exchange organizations 
(HIOs), a type of network that promotes secure electronic exchange of patient health information among hospitals, healthcare providers, 
community-based organizations, and public health authorities. With the emergence of complementary and alternative modes to facilitate 
exchange, we sought to assess the value of HIOs to hospital interoperability.
Methods: We leveraged nationally representative survey data from a unique linked dataset of N = 2200 hospitals linked to HIOs to examine the 
relationship between hospitals’ engagement in a range of interoperability activities and participation in an HIO that offers services to support those 
activities.
Results: We found that hospital participation in an HIO was significantly associated with greater engagement in clinical information exchange, 
public health reporting, and health-related social needs information exchange. However, among hospitals participating in an HIO, we did not find 
strong evidence of a relationship between specific HIO capabilities or services and hospital engagement in exchange.
Conclusion: Our findings indicate HIOs offer a useful avenue for exchange but are only one path through which exchange takes place as there 
are various alternatives available to support interoperability activities.
Key words: health information exchange; health information exchange organizations; interoperability; clinical information exchange; public health 
reporting; health-related social needs; national networks.
Received: May 7, 2025; Revised: June 18, 2025; Accepted: June 25, 2025 
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Project HOPE - The People-To-People Health Foundation, Inc. 2025. 
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.
Introduction 
Support for local, regional, and state health information ex­
change organizations (HIOs), a type of network that enables 
health information exchange across different entities, was an 
important component of the Health Information Technology 
for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act of 2009, 
highlighted by the State Health Information Exchange 
Cooperative Agreement Grants totaling over $500 million.1-3
As of 2023, approximately 135 HIOs existed with very differ­
ent capabilities to support exchange.4 Most hospitals report 
using multiple methods for exchange in addition to a HIO, in­
cluding prominent national health information exchange net­
works that connect healthcare providers, HIOs, public health 
authorities (PHAs), and payers (eg, CommonWell Health 
Alliance, e-Health Exchange, Carequality) and electronic 
health record (EHR) vendor networks (eg, Epic’s Care 
Everywhere), to support a range of interoperability-related ac­
tivities.5,6 Alternatives to HIOs also exist to support exchange 
in specific domains (eg, social care referrals or facilitating inte­
gration of apps with the EHR).7,8
Within this context, we sought to assess the degree to which 
HIOs impact hospitals’ engagement in interoperability. 
Understanding how impactful HIOs are to hospital interoper­
ability can help inform state and federal strategies, such as the 
Trusted Exchange Framework and Common Agreement™ 
(TEFCA™), a nationwide interoperability framework, author­
ized by Congress in the 21st Century Cures Act and launched 
in late 2023, designed to connect “health information net­
works,” inclusive of HIOs and other networks, through a 
common technical and policy foundation.9 TEFCA is intended 
to promote the secure exchange of standardized data across 
health information networks and thus is likely to accelerate 
existing trends towards connectivity across networks and 
bring opportunities and challenges for HIOs.4 Information 
on how HIOs’ plans to participate in TEFCA impacted hospi­
tals’ plans could provide useful information on the likely evo­
lution of nationwide information exchange through TEFCA 
and the options available to hospitals to participate in nation­
wide exchange.
To assess the value of HIOs to hospital interoperability as 
TEFCA went live, we leveraged nationally representative sur­
vey data from hospitals and state, regional, or local HIOs to 
examine whether hospital participation in an HIO and hos­
pital participation in an HIO that offered specific services 
were associated with greater engagement in clinical informa­
tion exchange, reporting to PHAs, and exchange of data on in­
dividuals’ health-related social needs (HRSN), such as reliable 
transportation, housing, and access to healthy food. We also 
examined whether HIOs’ plans to participate in TEFCA influ­
enced hospitals’ awareness or plans to participate in TEFCA. 
Specifically, we investigated whether: 
1. Clinical information exchange: Hospitals that participate 
in an HIO that participates in a national network and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/healthaffairsscholar/article/3/7/qxaf133/8176546 by guest on 21 March 2026
routinely makes data available in a structured format 
were more likely to report often engaging in clinical infor­
mation exchange (the ability to find, send, receive, inte­
grate information from outside sources).
2. Reporting to PHAs: Hospitals that participate in an HIO 
that supports public health reporting were more likely to 
electronically report information to PHAs.
3. HRSN information exchange: Hospitals that participate 
in an HIO that makes HRSN data available and have cap­
abilities or services to support HRSN information ex­
change were more likely to report electronically receiving 
or using HRSN data to inform patient care.
4. TEFCA participation: Hospitals that participate in an HIO 
that plans to participate in TEFCA were more likely to be 
aware of TEFCA or plan to participate, and whether that 
varied by hospital participation in national networks.
Data and methods 
Data 
This study leveraged a unique linked dataset of U.S. hospitals 
and HIOs. Hospital data came from the 2023 American 
Hospital Association (AHA) Information Technology (IT) 
Supplement, a nationally representative survey of U.S. 
hospitals fielded March to August 2023. This study was lim­
ited to non-federal acute care hospitals (N = 2,547, response 
rate = 58%), which have historically been the target of incen­
tive programs aimed at promoting interoperability. HIO data 
came from the 2023 HIO Survey, a near-census of HIOs led by 
the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy in 
collaboration with Civitas Networks for Health and the 
University of California San Francisco. The survey was fielded 
January to July 2023. The response rate for eligible HIOs was 
86% (N = 77); responding HIOs operated in 47 states and the 
District of Columbia.
HIO name was used to merge responses from the HIO sur­
vey into the AHA IT Supplement. Of the 2547 non-federal 
acute care hospital respondents to the IT Supplement, 490 
did not participate in an HIO and 1710 had at least 1 match 
in the HIO survey. The final analytic sample therefore in­
cluded 2200 non-federal acute care hospitals. 347 hospitals 
that responded to the AHA IT Supplement were excluded be­
cause they reported participating in an HIO but did not name 
that HIO or named an HIO that could not be matched to the 
HIO survey. For all analyses, we reported on the share of hos­
pitals connected to at least 1 HIO. Details on the data linkage 
and study sample are available in Appendix A.
Measures 
Outcome measures came from the AHA IT Supplement. 
Hospitals’ engagement in clinical information exchange was 
measured by the hospital reporting that they often or routinely 
find, send, receive, or integrate patient health information from 
sources outside their hospital or health system, or engage in all 4 
domains. Hospitals’ engagement in public health reporting was 
measured by hospital-reported use of electronic methods to 
submit data for syndromic surveillance, immunization registry, 
case reporting, laboratory (lab) result reporting, public health 
registry, and clinical data registry reporting. Hospitals’ engage­
ment in HRSN information exchange was measured by 
hospital-reported receipt of HRSN data and subsequent use 
of data received for internal purposes—to make referrals to so­
cial service organizations, inform clinical decision-making, and 
discharge planning—as well as for secondary uses—to conduct 
population health analytics and inform community needs as­
sessment or other equity initiatives. We also captured hospitals’ 
awareness of and plans to participate in TEFCA.
Our main independent variable of interest came from the 
AHA IT Supplement and indicated hospitals that participated 
in at least 1 HIO. We examined the relationship between HIO 
participation and all outcomes. Other key independent varia­
bles of interest came from the HIO survey and were mapped to 
specific groups of outcomes. For each clinical information ex­
change outcome, independent variables included whether a 
connected HIO participated in a national network or made pa­
tient health information available in a structured format (ie, 
structured care summaries and data consistent with the 
United States Core Data for Interoperability (USCDI) v1/v2 
and using the Health Level Seven (HL7®) Fast Healthcare 
Interoperability Resources® (FHIR®) standard). For each 
public health reporting outcome, independent variables in­
cluded whether a connected HIO was connected to a state or 
local PHA and offered public health reporting services to sup­
port that specific reporting type (eg, HIO services to support 
electronic case reporting were mapped to the electronic case 
reporting outcome). For each HRSN information exchange 
outcome, independent variables included whether a connected 
HIO made HRSN data available as part of a clinical document 
or as a structured data element, used a social service referral 
platform (such as Unite Us or Aunt Bertha), offered 
closed-loop referrals tracking that could provide hospitals 
with updated information on referrals that originated in the 
hospital and progressed to a community-based organization 
or social service setting, or identified gaps in care. We also in­
cluded a variable indicating whether a connected HIO planned 
to participate in TEFCA as a Qualified Health Information 
Network® (QHIN™), participant, or sub-participant, which 
may influence hospitals’ awareness of or plans to participate 
in TEFCA. Appendix Table B1 shows how each independent 
variable maps to each measure category. Survey questions 
used to create key measures are available in Appendix C.
Covariates came from the AHA Annual Survey and in­
cluded hospital size, ownership, teaching status, system affili­
ation, location (urban vs rural), critical access designation, 
and participation in value-based care (participation in an ac­
countable care organization, patient-centered medical home 
program, or pay for performance arrangement). We also con­
trolled for hospital participation in at least 1 major national 
network (CommonWell Health Alliance, e-Health Exchange, 
or Carequality) or EHR vendor-based network.
Analysis 
First, we described the share of hospitals that participated in an 
HIO, and the share connected to an HIO that had capabilities 
or services to facilitate clinical information exchange, public 
health reporting, HRSN information exchange, or participa­
tion in TEFCA. We then examined the relationship between 
these outcomes of interest by HIO participation and the avail­
ability of specific HIO services to support that activity using 
separate weighted linear probability models, adjusted for hos­
pital characteristics and participation in a national network 
or EHR vendor-based network. All results were weighted to ac­
count for non-response and to generate national estimates. A 
logistic regression model was used to predict the propensity 
of survey response as a function of hospital characteristics, 
including size, ownership, teaching status, system affiliation, 
2                                                                                                                                                         Health Affairs Scholar, 2025, 3(7), qxaf133
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/healthaffairsscholar/article/3/7/qxaf133/8176546 by guest on 21 March 2026
and availability of a cardiac intensive care unit, location, and 
region. Hospital-level weights were derived by the inverse of 
the predicted propensity. For all models, P values < 0.05 
were considered statistically significant. Data analyses 
were performed between August 2024 and February 2025 
using Stata/SE, version 15.1 (StataCorp).
Results 
Availability of HIO services to facilitate information 
exchange 
In 2023, 75% of hospitals participated in an HIO (Appendix 
Table B1). More than half (59%) were connected to an HIO 
that participated in a national network and routinely made 
available care summaries in a structured format (54%). 
Fewer hospitals were connected to an HIO that routinely ex­
changed information using the FHIR standard (17%) and rou­
tinely exchanged information consistent with USCDI v1 or v2 
(36%). About three-quarters of hospitals participated in an 
HIO that was connected to at least 1 state or local PHA 
(74%). However, only some of these hospitals were connected 
to an HIO that offered the following reporting services to 
PHAs: immunization registry (54%), syndromic surveillance 
(53%), electronic lab reporting (50%), electronic case report­
ing (30%), public health registry (40%), and clinical data 
registry reporting (45%). While half of hospitals (48%) par­
ticipated in an HIO that made HRSN data available, fewer 
participated in an HIO that used a social service referral plat­
form (16%), offered closed-loop referrals tracking (32%), or 
identified gaps in care (32%). About half of hospitals (53%) 
participated in an HIO that planned to participate in TEFCA.
Clinical information exchange 
Hospitals that participated in an HIO were more likely to re­
port engagement in each of the 4 domains of clinical informa­
tion exchange individually, but not collectively, compared 
with non-participants (eg, 79% vs 67% for finding informa­
tion) (Figure 1, Appendix Table B3). There were no significant 
differences in hospitals’ engagement in clinical information 
exchange by participation in an HIO that participated in a na­
tional network.
Evidence of a relationship between hospital engagement 
in interoperable exchange and participation in an HIO 
that routinely made information available in a structured 
or standardized format was mixed. Hospitals connected to 
an HIO that sent structured care summaries were less likely 
to report routinely receiving and integrating information 
compared with hospitals that participated in an HIO that 
did not make structured care summaries available (78% vs 
82% and 60% vs 66%, respectively). Conversely, hospitals 
connected to an HIO that routinely sent data consistent with 
USCDI v1 or v2 were more likely to report routinely inte­
grating information (66% vs 57%) compared with hospitals 
that participated in an HIO that did not make data available 
consistent with USCDI. Hospitals connected to an HIO that 
routinely shared data using the FHIR standard were also 
more likely to report integrating and being engaged in all 4 
domains of clinical information exchange compared with 
hospitals connected to an HIO that did not make data avail­
able using the FHIR standard (68% vs 60% and 62% vs 
48%, respectively). There were no significant differences in 
rates of hospitals finding or sending information by partici­
pation in an HIO that made data available in a structured 
format.
Public health reporting 
Hospitals participating in an HIO were more likely to report 
engagement in each of the 6 types of electronic public health 
reporting compared with non-participants (eg, 97% vs 91% 
for immunization registry reporting) (Figure 2, Appendix 
Table B5). Hospitals connected to an HIO that offered services 
to support public health reporting were also more likely to be 
Figure 1. Hospital engagement in clinical information exchange, by participation in an HIO with capabilities or services to support clinical information 
exchange. Source: 2023 AHA IT Supplement and 2023 HIO Survey. All percentages are weighted percentages adjusted for hospital characteristics and 
participation in a national network or EHR vendor-based network. *Indicates significantly higher rates of hospitals’ engagement in clinical information 
exchange among HIO participants relative to non-participants. ^Indicates significantly higher rates of hospitals’ engagement in clinical information 
exchange among participants whose HIO offers a specific service or capability to support exchange relative to those whose HIO does not offer that 
service or capability. Statistical significance was assessed at the 5% level (P < 0.05).
Health Affairs Scholar, 2025, 3(7), qxaf133                                                                                                                                                         3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/healthaffairsscholar/article/3/7/qxaf133/8176546 by guest on 21 March 2026
engaged in electronic public health reporting, but only for elec­
tronic reportable lab result (95% vs 90%), public health regis­
try (84% vs 79%) and clinical data registry (81% vs 74%) 
reporting.
HRSN information exchange 
Hospitals participating in an HIO were more likely to report 
receiving data from outside sources compared with non- 
participants (60% vs 51%). HIO participants were also 
more likely to use data received from outside sources for dif­
ferent purposes compared with non-participants (eg, 45% vs 
35% for making referrals, 37% vs 30% for population health 
analytics) (Figure 3, Appendix Table B7).
However, evidence of a relationship between hospitals’ re­
ceipt and use of HRSN data and participation in an HIO 
that offered services to support HRSN information exchange 
was mixed. Hospitals that participated in an HIO that made 
HRSN data available were more likely to report using data 
to make referrals (50% vs 43%) and inform community needs 
assessments (37% vs 32%), yet less likely to report using data 
for clinical decision-making (42% vs 52%), discharge plan­
ning (39% vs 53%), and population health analytics (38% 
vs 43%) (Appendix Table B7). Hospitals connected to an 
HIO that used a social service referral platform were more 
likely to report using data to inform discharge planning 
(49% vs 43%) yet less likely to report using data to make re­
ferrals (43% vs 49%). Compared with hospitals connected to 
an HIO that did not offer these services, hospitals connected to 
an HIO that identified gaps in care were more likely to report 
using data to inform discharge planning (50% vs 39%).
Planned participation in TEFCA 
Hospitals participating in an HIO were more likely to report 
being aware of TEFCA and have plans to participate com­
pared with non-participants (79% vs 59% and 65% vs 
45%, respectively) (Figure 4, Appendix Table B9). Hospitals 
connected to an HIO that planned to participate in TEFCA 
were also more likely to be aware of TEFCA and plan to par­
ticipate compared with those connected to an HIO without 
plans to participate in TEFCA (84% vs 78% and 70% vs 
64%, respectively).
Rates of TEFCA awareness and plans to participate were 
higher among HIO participants relative to non-participants, 
regardless of their participation in a broader national net­
work. For example, among hospitals participating in 
e-Health exchange, HIO participants were more likely to be 
aware of and plan to participate in TEFCA compared with 
non-participants (97% vs 89% and 93% vs 80%, respective­
ly) (Appendix Table B9). Findings were similar for hospitals 
participating in other national networks and EHR vendor- 
based networks.
Discussion 
In 2023, three-quarters of non-federal acute care hospitals in 
the U.S. were connected to at least 1 state, regional, or local 
HIO. Our findings suggest that hospital participation in an 
HIO was associated with greater engagement in clinical infor­
mation exchange, public health reporting, and receipt and use 
of HRSN data. Participation in an HIO was also associated 
with a greater likelihood of hospitals having plans to participate 
in TEFCA, regardless of their participation in a broader nation­
al network. However, our findings do not provide strong evi­
dence of a relationship between specific services offered by 
HIOs to support health information exchange and hospitals’ 
engagement in exchange. These findings suggest that HIOs offer 
value to hospital interoperability activities, but that hospitals 
are not dependent on HIOs to support interoperable exchange.
Hospital connectivity to HIOs was associated with 6–12 per­
centage-point greater rates of routine engagement in clinical in­
formation exchange, which suggests HIO participation may 
help facilitate some hospitals’ ability to receive and share data 
with other providers. However, we observed no difference in 
Figure 2. Hospital engagement in electronic public health reporting, by participation in an HIO with capabilities or services to support public health 
reporting. Source: 2023 AHA IT Supplement and 2023 HIO Survey. All percentages are weighted percentages adjusted for hospital characteristics and 
participation in a national network or vendor-based network. *Indicates significantly higher rates of hospitals’ engagement in electronic public health 
reporting among HIO participants relative to non-participants. ^Indicates significantly higher rates of hospitals’ engagement in electronic public health 
reporting among participants whose HIO offers services to support that reporting type relative to those whose HIO does not offer that service. Statistical 
significance was assessed at the 5% level (P < 0.05).
4                                                                                                                                                         Health Affairs Scholar, 2025, 3(7), qxaf133
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/healthaffairsscholar/article/3/7/qxaf133/8176546 by guest on 21 March 2026
engagement in exchange in hospitals that participated in HIOs 
that did or did not support structured care summaries—a core 
capability related to exchange. One interpretation of this dy­
namic, and similar ones we observe in other domains, is 
that hospitals that participate in an HIO are also otherwise 
more likely to engage in exchange through other means, in­
flating the association between HIO participation broadly 
and engagement in clinical information exchange. In 
contrast, we did observe a difference between hospitals par­
ticipating in HIOs with advanced capabilities to support 
interoperable exchange—through their support for USCDI 
and FHIR-based exchange—who were more likely to be en­
gaged in clinical care exchange than hospitals participating 
in HIOs without those capabilities.
Beyond facilitating clinical information exchange, HIO 
services have increasingly evolved to facilitate exchange 
Figure 3. Hospital engagement in HRSN information exchange, by participation in an HIO with capabilities or services to support HRSN information 
exchange. Source: 2023 AHA IT Supplement and 2023 HIO Survey. All percentages are weighted percentages adjusted for hospital characteristics and 
participation in a national network or vendor-based network. This figure illustrates the relationship between HIO participation and hospitals’ receipt and 
use of data for internal purposes (making referrals, clinical-decision making, discharge planning); estimates of the relationship between HIO participation 
and hospitals’ use of data for secondary purposes (informing community needs assessment and population health analytics) are reported in Appendix 
Table B7. *Indicates significantly higher rates of hospitals’ engagement in HRSN information exchange among HIO participants relative to 
non-participants. ^Indicates significantly higher rates of hospitals’ engagement in HRSN information exchange among participants whose HIO offers a 
specific service or capability to support exchange relative to those whose HIO does not offer that service or capability. Statistical significance was 
assessed at the 5% level (P < 0.05).
Figure 4. Hospitals’ awareness of and planned participation in TEFCA, by participation in an HIO that plans to participate in TEFCA. Source: 2023 AHA IT 
Supplement and 2023 HIO Survey. All percentages are weighted percentages adjusted for hospital characteristics and participation in a national network 
or vendor-based network. *Indicates significantly higher rates of hospitals’ awareness or plans to participate in TEFCA among HIO participants relative to 
non-participants. ^Indicates significantly higher rates of hospitals’ awareness or plans to participate in TEFCA among participants whose HIO plans to 
participate in TEFCA relative to those whose HIO does not have plans to participate in TEFCA. Statistical significance was assessed at the 5% level  
(P < 0.05).
Health Affairs Scholar, 2025, 3(7), qxaf133                                                                                                                                                         5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/healthaffairsscholar/article/3/7/qxaf133/8176546 by guest on 21 March 2026
between healthcare and public health. During the COVID-19 
pandemic, there was significant federal investment in enhancing 
HIO services to support electronic reporting to PHAs, much of 
which was focused on improving the timeliness, accuracy, and 
completeness of lab and case reporting.10 In our study, HIO 
participation was associated with higher rates of engagement 
in all types of public health reporting. Further, hospitals con­
nected to an HIO that supported electronic lab reporting had 
significantly higher rates of reporting compared with hospitals 
connected to an HIO that did not offer this service. We did not 
see similar results for electronic case reporting, which has faced 
more substantial challenges to adoption despite rapid growth in 
use during the COVID-19 pandemic.11 These findings suggest 
HIO services are utilized for lab reports more than case reports, 
likely due to electronic lab reporting being widely used by both 
hospitals and PHAs.12 The availability of HIO services to sup­
port public health reporting made no difference for the most 
common reporting types (immunization and syndromic surveil­
lance), which suggests there may be preferred alternatives for 
submitting these data types. However, our findings indicate 
that HIOs may facilitate reporting for less common reporting 
types (eg, clinical data registry reporting), perhaps by alleviating 
reporting challenges, such as the technical complexity of inter­
faces, transmission, or submission.13
Evidence of a relationship between hospitals’ receipt and 
use of HRSN data and the availability of specific HIO services 
to support HRSN information exchange was even more 
mixed. While HIO participants were consistently more likely 
to report receiving and using HRSN data from outside sour­
ces, there were no consistent signals to suggest services offered 
by HIOs—including making HRSN data available to partici­
pants—facilitated hospitals’ engagement in HRSN information 
exchange. It is possible that hospitals are utilizing these services 
directly (not mediated by an HIO) or have established other 
processes for receiving HRSN data to facilitate different uses, 
such that these services offered by HIOs do not drive differences 
in receipt or use. It is also possible that organization-specific cul­
ture and ethics related to the use of HRSN are stronger drivers on 
the decision to use HRSN data from outside the organization 
than data availability through HIOs, resulting in these limited 
correlations.
Finally, we found that hospitals participating in an HIO that 
planned to participate in TEFCA were more likely to be aware 
of TEFCA and have their own plans to participate, regardless 
of hospitals’ participation in a national network, which may 
also affect hospitals’ awareness or plans to participate since 
some of these are QHINs. While TEFCA provides opportun­
ities for all hospitals to participate in streamlined exchange re­
gardless of participation in an HIO, our findings suggest HIO 
participation may uniquely contribute to hospitals’ readiness 
to participate in TEFCA, possibly because HIOs could facili­
tate hospital participation in TEFCA as a participant or sub- 
participant to the HIO. However, the overall magnitude of 
this association was relatively small with 64% of hospitals 
that participated in an HIO that did not plan to participate 
in TEFCA nevertheless planning to participate, indicating 
the salience of other options. Because TEFCA participation 
is voluntary, it will be important to monitor whether HIOs 
are effective at supporting participation by hospitals and other 
healthcare organizations, what types of healthcare organiza­
tions choose not to participate in TEFCA even when provided 
the option by their HIO, and which healthcare organizations 
lack a viable path to participate.
Limitations 
The data used for this study represent self-reports of hospitals’ 
engagement in health information exchange and HIO capabil­
ities or services to support exchange at a single point in time. 
We were not able to verify actual HIO capabilities or availabil­
ity of services at the time in which hospitals would have used 
them. Further, availability of HIO services does not reflect ac­
tual use by hospitals. It’s possible that hospitals did not use or 
were not aware of specific services made available to them 
through the HIO(s) in which they participated. While all esti­
mates were adjusted for observable hospital characteristics 
and participation in a national network or EHR vendor-based 
network, it is possible that hospitals with the resources and 
technical capabilities to exchange were more likely to self- 
select into HIO participation.
Our findings demonstrate an association between hospital 
participation in HIOs and engagement in exchange; we do 
not establish a causal relationship between HIO participa­
tion and hospital interoperability. It is also possible the value 
HIOs add to hospital interoperability is not fully captured by 
higher rates of exchange, but in better data quality (ie, im­
provements in the completeness of records). Finally, conclu­
sions from this survey indicate HIOs’ value to hospital 
interoperability; HIOs may offer more or less value to other 
healthcare providers, community-based organizations, or 
other entities.
Conclusion 
Using a unique linked dataset of hospitals and HIOs, this 
study provides evidence to suggest HIOs may help facilitate 
hospitals’ ability to receive and share data with other pro­
viders and PHAs. Our findings indicate that hospital participa­
tion in HIOs is common and was significantly associated with 
greater engagement in clinical information exchange, public 
health reporting, HRSN information exchange, as well as 
plans to participate in TEFCA. However, in many cases, hos­
pitals participating in HIOs that offered specific supportive 
services did not participate in exchange at greater rates. 
These dynamics indicate that participation in a HIO with spe­
cific capabilities may have limited impact because hospitals are 
likely to engage in interoperability through alternative net­
works or by leveraging other technologies. Based on our find­
ings, HIOs appear to offer a useful avenue for exchange and 
reporting activities but are only one path through which this 
exchange takes place.
Supplementary material 
Supplementary material is available at Health Affairs Scholar 
online.
Funding 
None declared.
Conflicts of interest 
The authors do not have any conflicts of interest to disclose. 
Please see ICMJE form(s) for author conflicts of interest. 
These have been provided as supplementary materials.
6                                                                                                                                                         Health Affairs Scholar, 2025, 3(7), qxaf133
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/healthaffairsscholar/article/3/7/qxaf133/8176546 by guest on 21 March 2026
Notes 
1.
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy/Office of the 
National Coordinator for Health IT. State health information ex­
change. Accessed November 20, 2024. HealthIT.gov. https://www. 
healthit.gov/topic/onc-hitech-programs/state-health-information- 
exchange
2.
Dullabh P, Hovey L, Ubri P. Evaluation of the state health informa­
tion exchange cooperative agreement program: case study synthe­
sis: experiences from five states in enabling HIE. 2013. Accessed 
November 20, 2024. https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/ 
casestudysynthesisdocument_2-8-13.pdf
3.
Adler-Milstein J, Bates DW, Jha AK. Operational health informa­
tion exchanges show substantial growth, but long-term funding re­
mains a concern. Health Aff (Millwood). 2013;32(8):1486-1492. 
(In English). https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2013.0124
4.
Everson J, Chang W, Patel V, Adler-Milstein J. The state of health 
information organizations and plans to participate in the federal ex­
change framework. Health Aff Sch. 2024;2(8):qxae098. https://doi. 
org/10.1093/haschl/qxae098
5.
Everson J, Patel V. Hospital’s adoption of multiple methods of ob­
taining outside information and use of that information. J Am Med 
Inform Assoc. 2022;29(9):1489-1496. https://doi.org/10.1093/ 
jamia/ocac079
6.
Pylypchuk Y, Everson J. Interoperability and Methods of Exchange 
among Hospitals in 2021. ONC Data Brief, no. 64. Washington, 
DC: Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information 
Technology; 2023.
7.
Unite Us. The leading SDOH screening and referral platform 
for providers and patients. Unite Us. Accessed November 20, 
2024. https://uniteus.com/solutions/providers/
8.
Redox. Your highway to better healthcare. Accessed November 20, 
2024. https://redoxengine.com/
9.
Tripathi M, Yeager M. TEFCA live! the future of network inter­
operability is here. Health Affairs Forefront. 2023.
10. The Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information 
Technology (ONC). Strengthening the technical advancement & 
readiness of public health via health information exchange program 
(The STAR HIE Program). The office of the national coordinator 
for health information technology (ONC). Accessed November 
20, 2024. https://www.healthit.gov/topic/star-hie-program
11. Knicely K, Loonsk JW, Hamilton JJ, Fine A, Conn LA. Electronic 
case reporting development, implementation, and expansion in 
the United States. Public Health Rep. 2024;139(4):432-442. (In 
eng). https://doi.org/10.1177/00333549241227160
12. The Pew Charitable Trusts. State public health data reporting policies 
and practices vary widely. December 12, 2024. Accessed April 29, 
2025. https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/reports/ 
2024/12/state-public-health-data-reporting-policies-and-practices- 
vary-widely
13. Richwine C. Progress and Ongoing Challenges to Electronic 
Public Health Reporting Among Non-Federal Acute Care 
Hospitals. ONC Data Brief, no. 66. Washington, DC: Office of 
the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology; 
2023.
Health Affairs Scholar, 2025, 3(7), qxaf133                                                                                                                                                         7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/healthaffairsscholar/article/3/7/qxaf133/8176546 by guest on 21 March 2026
