Research and Applications
Interoperability with multiple Fast Healthcare
Interoperability Resources (FHIRV
R) profiles and versions
Mark A. Kramer1 and Chris Moesel2
1Health Innovation Center, MITRE Corporation, Bedford, Massachusetts, USA and 2Open Health Solutions Department, MITRE
Corporation, Bedford, Massachusetts, USA
Corresponding Author: Mark A. Kramer, PhD, Health Innovation Center, MITRE Corporation, 202 Burlington Road, Bedford,
MA 01730-1420, USA; mkramer@mitre.org
Received 22 August 2022; Revised 17 December 2022; Editorial Decision 1 January 2023; Accepted 3 January 2023
ABSTRACT
Objective: To provide a method for evaluating the interoperability of Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources
(FHIR
V
R) clients and servers supporting different FHIR resources, proﬁles, and versions, and to determine the fea-
sibility of FHIR servers supporting multiple FHIR Implementation Guides (IGs).
Materials and Methods: A method of analysis, the FHIR Interoperability Table (FHIT), is proposed. The FHIT
involves the concept of a “catchment,” the type or category of data that a proﬁle is intended to represent. The
solution ﬁrst aligns sender and/or receiver proﬁles according to their catchments, then determines the relation-
ship between the admittances of those proﬁles, and ﬁnally interprets the relationship in terms of the feasibility
of data exchange.
Results: The FHIT method is demonstrated by analyzing the FHIR-based exchange between the US Core IG and
the International Patient Summary IG.
Discussion: The last few years have witnessed a signiﬁcant growth in Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resour-
ces (FHIR), resulting in several major versions of FHIR, hundreds of IGs, and thousands of FHIR proﬁles. Pre-
vious work and available tools have not fully addressed the problem of interoperability between clients and
servers that support different FHIR resources, proﬁles, and versions.
Conclusion: Application of the proposed methodology allows interoperability problems in FHIR networks to be
identiﬁed. In some cases, new proﬁles that resolve those conﬂicts can be derived, using intersections of the
original proﬁles. There is a need for additional tools that implement the proposed method, as well as structured
methods for expressing catchments in FHIR proﬁles.
Key words: health information exchange, health information interoperability, FHIR, HL7
Lay Summary
A method is proposed for evaluating the interoperability of systems based on the Health Level 7 Fast Healthcare Interoper-
ability Resources (HL7
V
R FHIR
V
R) standard. Exchanges based on FHIR are not automatically compatible because FHIR senders
and receivers can operate under different rules and potentially deploy different versions of FHIR. The proposed method can
be applied early in the design process to ensure that any proposed rules governing exchanges are mutually compatible.
This is the ﬁrst time that such a methodology has been proposed.
V
C The MITRE Corporation 2023.
All rights reserved. Approved for public release. Distribution unlimited 22-00367-11.
1
JAMIA Open, 6(1), 2023, ooad001
https://doi.org/10.1093/jamiaopen/ooad001
Research and Applications
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamiaopen/article/6/1/ooad001/7030744 by guest on 21 March 2026
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE
Motivation
Health Level 7 Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (HL7
V
R
FHIR
V
R)1 is a popular standard for electronic exchange of health
information. FHIR defines a data exchange syntax, an application
programming interface, and a set of health-related data objects
called “resources.” Each type of resource represents a different cate-
gory of health data.
By design, FHIR can be adapted for different healthcare use
cases. Customization involves profiling, where FHIR built-in (or
“base”) resource types are modified. The overall description of how
to use FHIR for a use case is then provided by an Implementation
Guide (IG). The FHIR community has created hundreds of IGs and
thousands of profiles, using several different FHIR versions.2 Appli-
cations following different IGs may not be able to interoperate.3
Background
Testing an individual system for conformance to the FHIR specification
is supported by tools such as Touchstone,4 Crucible,5 and Inferno.6
Unfortunately, confirming that 2 systems conform to their respective
specifications does not imply that those 2 systems can interoperate.
In FHIR, base resource definitions and profiles are represented
by StructureDefinitions (SDs).7 An SD includes element-by-element
definition of data types, value sets, cardinality, and more. Profiles
derive from base resource definitions by the addition of constraints
(such as narrowed cardinality or restricted data types) and specifica-
tion of extension structures.
The FHIR Validator8 can test if a resource validates against a
given SD (the terms “validates against,” “fits,” and “conforms to”
are used interchangeably in this article). It includes a profile compari-
son function that creates a report highlighting the differences between
2 profiles. The validator also creates an intersection profile by com-
bining the constraints in the source profiles, defining the characteris-
tics of resources that conform simultaneously to both profiles.
Although the significance of intersection profiles to interoper-
ability was noted in previous studies,9,10 some details were over-
looked; most significantly, the matching of sender and receiver SDs
according to the type of information exchanged. For example,
FHIR’s BodyWeight and BodyHeight profiles11 have a null intersec-
tion because they are identified by different fixed codes (Observa-
tion.code), but there is no interoperability problem because they
apply to different types of data. Later, we introduce the concept of
catchments to formalize this insight.
The relationship between 2 profiles, A and B, can be represented
by a Venn diagram that represents the sets of resources conforming
to each profile.12 There are 5 possible relationships (Figure 1):
•
Equivalent, if the same set of resources ﬁt both proﬁles;
•
Subset, if all resources that ﬁt A also ﬁt B (not vice versa);
•
Superset, if all resources that ﬁt B also ﬁt A (not vice versa);
•
Overlapping, if some (not all) resources ﬁt both proﬁles;
•
Disjoint, if no resource ﬁts both proﬁles.
These relationships also apply when comparing different versions
of the same SD. Areas of overlap represent the set of resources con-
forming to the intersection profile of A and B.
OBJECTIVE
The goal of this article is to provide a systematic method to analyze
interoperability in an FHIR ecosystem of clients and servers that
support different resource types, FHIR versions, and profiles. The
resulting analysis provides the ability to detect and address intero-
perability problems before they arise and facilitate modifications
that might avert noninteroperable systems.
METHODOLOGY
Catchments
We define a profile’s catchment as the type or category of data the
profile is intended to represent. Profiles are designed to represent
certain kinds of data in the context of a jurisdiction (“realm”) and a
use case (such as claims processing). For example, the US Core
(USC) MedicationRequest profile is designed to represent “an order
or request for both supply of the medication and the instructions for
administration of the medication to a patient, and patient-reported
medications.”14 The purpose of the International Patient Summary
(IPS) DeviceObserverUvIps profile is to “describe a device that plays
the role of observer or performer.”15 We define an applicable profile
to be any profile whose catchment includes the information in ques-
tion, within the context of a jurisdiction and use case. For example,
the USC MedicationRequest profile is applicable to patient-reported
medications in the United States.
We define a profile’s admittance as the set of FHIR resources
that conform to the profile (the circles of the Venn diagrams in Fig-
ure 1). The admittance can be larger than the catchment (Figure 2)
but should never be smaller; otherwise, the profile would rule out
the things it is supposed to represent. Applying the profile can be
conceptualized as taking information in the profile’s catchment and
mapping it into the profile’s admittance. While the admittance of a
profile is objectively determinable, catchments require the interpre-
tation of profile narratives. Later, we discuss the possibility of add-
ing structured representations of catchments to accelerate the
analysis demonstrated in this article.
The challenge of matching a profile’s admittance to its catchment
derives in part from the difficulty of defining accurate and complete
value sets. For example, USC Implantable Device,16 uses a value set
that includes both implantable and nonimplantable devices. Remov-
ing nonimplantable devices could shrink the profile’s admittance, but
if an extensible binding is used, the admittance becomes essentially
infinite, unless the implementation can determine whether a novel
code represents an implantable device not in the original set. Today’s
Figure 1. Possible relationships between resources conforming to StructureDeﬁnitions A and B.
2
JAMIA Open, 2023, Vol. 6, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamiaopen/article/6/1/ooad001/7030744 by guest on 21 March 2026
algorithms lack the semantic understanding to decide this, so the typi-
cal fallback position for extensible bindings is to accept any code.
Only required bindings definitively limit the admittance of a profile.
Feasibility of exchange
Consider an exchange where the SD applied by the sender is A, and
that enforced by the receiver is B. The exchange is feasible if every
resource that validates against A also validates against B, that is, the
relationship between A and B is equivalent or subset. It is potentially
infeasible if only some possible resources conform to B—the super-
set or overlapping cases. Exchange is infeasible if disjoint. Feasibility
is considered on an element-by-element basis since any infeasible
element makes exchanging the resource infeasible.
In determining feasibility of exchange, the first consideration is the
permitted number of occurrences. If occurrences on the sender side do
not overlap those permitted by the receiver, the exchange is infeasible.
If there is partial overlap, the exchange is potentially infeasible. For
top-level elements, occurrences correspond to minimum and maxi-
mum cardinalities. Nested elements must account for the fact that if a
parent element is optional, child elements are effectively optional.
The second consideration involves the potential values of the ele-
ment. If no value on the sender side is acceptable to the receiver, the
exchange is infeasible. If there is a mix of acceptable and unaccept-
able values, it is potentially infeasible. Data types, upper and lower
bounds for quantitative values, and maximum length for strings
must be considered. For elements enumerated by value sets, FHIR
uses 4 binding strengths.13 Preferred and example do not constrain
potential values, while required restricts the value to terms in the
value set. Extensible implies that additional values are allowed only
if the concept is not covered in receiver’s value set. Typically, algo-
rithms treat extensible bindings as if they do not constrain potential
values. FHIR also supports a maximum binding to use with extensi-
ble and preferred that restricts additional codes.17
Other factors include computed constraints (invariants), the
order of sliced elements, whether a slice admits additional values,
the use of data absent reasons, and the representation and version
restrictions on referenced resources.
Assumptions must be made to account for “Must Support”
(MS), since the meaning of MS is not precisely defined by FHIR.
One such assumption is that even when an element is optional, the
sender must send that element if the data are available. Under this
interpretation, MS does not affect the potential number of occur-
rences nor the values of an element, and therefore, has no impact in
compatibility analysis.
Multiple IG support
Conflicts can also occur within a single sender or receiver that sup-
ports multiple profiles. A resource-originating system must manage
the transformation of non-FHIR data into an FHIR representation
that accounts for all applicable profiles, “applicable” being defined
as above in terms of profile catchments. Unlike topological catch-
ments (watersheds), profile catchments can overlap. For example,
the US Military Service History (USMSH) IG18 defines a profile for
military veterans, and the Personal Health Device (PHD) IG19
defines one for patients using personal health gateways.
Assuming non-FHIR data are being mapped into FHIR for
exchange purposes, multiple applicable profiles present senders with
a choice of which profile(s) to apply when constructing resources.
One approach is to set up separate server endpoints, one for each
IG, and allow the client to choose the appropriate endpoint for its
purpose. This approach works even if the applicable SDs have a null
intersection but requires implementing multiple servers. Another
approach (not supported in FHIR) would have the receiver specify
the profile(s) the sender should apply. Profile search, using the
standard search parameter _profile, only matches resources
based on the meta.profile element, and neither tests conform-
ance nor influences resource construction. Another option would be
to return multiple versions of the same information, conforming to
different profiles, and have the client choose the version it prefers,
but this seems more confusing than setting up different endpoints.
The final option is for the sender to construct resources that simulta-
neously satisfy applicable profiles, using the intersection profile. For
subset and superset relationships, the most constrained profile
would be implemented. For overlapping profiles, the constraints
would be combined. For example, to satisfy both the US Veteran
and PHD Patient profiles, resources must conform to USC patient
profile as required by USMSH and include the specific value in
meta.profile required by PHD.
If the intersection is null, the applicable profiles cannot be satis-
fied simultaneously. A sender could potentially pick one of the appli-
cable profiles, ignoring the others, but the resulting resource would
fail to conform to other applicable profiles. In some cases, a null
intersection of similar profiles may not indicate an actual conflict.
Consider an electronic health record (EHR) that has data on an indi-
vidual’s tobacco use history. Suppose it is possible to derive both the
current smoking status and the number of pack-years smoked from
that data, creating resources that conform to different profiles. It
might appear there are 2 applicable profiles for the EHR’s smoking
data, but the catchments of the profiles are actually different. One
profile is meant to capture smoking in the present, the other in the
past. The resource originator has discretion about which profile(s)
to use or populate, but this does not bear on the interoperability
analysis any more than supporting other distinct, nonoverlapping
profiles.
FHIR versions
Resources with different FHIR versions, or profiles based on differ-
ent FHIR versions, can be analyzed in the same fashion as above,
first by aligning the resources supported by the sender with the cor-
responding resources from the receiver and then comparing each ele-
ment for changes in permissible occurrences, values, etc.
When comparing different versions of an item, the terms forward
compatible and backward compatible are sometimes used.20 Back-
ward compatible means that the old item is compatible with newer
versions of itself (ie, every possible resource based on the older SD
will validate against the newer SD). Forward compatible means the
new item is compatible with older versions of itself (ie, every possi-
ble resource based on the newer SD will validate against the older
Figure 2. Conceptual relationship between catchment and admittance of a
proﬁle.
JAMIA Open, 2023, Vol. 6, No. 1
3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamiaopen/article/6/1/ooad001/7030744 by guest on 21 March 2026
SD). In all other cases, there are no guarantees of compatibility, but
it may be possible for some resources to validate under both ver-
sions; hence exchanges are potentially infeasible (see Table 1). This
article steers away from these terms because they tend to foster con-
fusion.
Interoperability table
The objective of the FHIR Interoperability Table (FHIT) is to align
the SDs applied by a sender with those enforced by a receiver. The
feasibility of exchange then can be determined by evaluating the
relationships between aligned SDs. The FHIT applies to a single
sender/receiver combination and must be repeated to analyze multi-
ple pairings. When populating an FHIT, only SDs that are enforced
should be included. These are the SDs that define the resources the
sender might send and those the receiver is willing to accept. The
FHIT can be used at design time to anticipate interoperability prob-
lems or to analyze existing systems.
The table consists of the following 7 columns:
1. Base resource column lists all the FHIR base resource types that
may be transferred from the sender to the receiver.
2. Sender SD column lists all SDs that the sender may apply to the
resource in column 1. If more than 1 SD applies, subdivide the
row.
3. Sender Catchment contains a textual description of the type of
information the SD in column 2 applies to.
4. Receiver SD contains the SDs (if any) that the receiver enforces
for information listed in column 3. If more than 1 SD applies,
the row should be subdivided.
5. Receiver Catchment contains a textual description of the type of
information the SD in column 4 applies to.
6. Conclusion holds the result: feasible if the relationship between
proﬁles is equivalent or subset, potentially infeasible if superset
or overlapping, and infeasible if disjoint. If column 4 is blank,
the result is infeasible.
7. Explanation captures the reasons for the (potential) infeasibility.
Population of the FHIT can be aided by referencing the IG’s
CapabilityStatement (CS).21 The CS resource is required of FHIR
servers and allows the server to summarize its behaviors in a stand-
ard way, providing the FHIR version, operations, supported resour-
ces, and profiles that apply to each resource. If a minimum profile
(rest.resource.profile) is given, resources must validate
against one of the supported profiles (rest.resource.suppor-
tedProfile) or the minimum profile.22 In practice, however, the
CS is not always provided, in which case the analyst must obtain
this information from system specifications, system creators, or
observed behavior.
Systems vary in terms of how strictly they enforce profile con-
formance. Some systems ignore profiles and validate only against
base resources. This is typical of test servers23 and intermediaries
that receive, store, or forward existing FHIR resources, such as
information exchanges24 and clinical endpoints that display infor-
mation from multiple sources. This behavior ensures no valid
resource is rejected, but data may be harder to use due to uncon-
trolled variability. Strict enforcement is associated with resource
originators, who must pattern each new resource according to some
SD, and systems that use resources in contexts that demand data
conformity, such as workflow processes, analytics, and performance
metrics. As mentioned above, when populating the FHIT, only SDs
that are strictly enforced should be included.
RESULTS
This section analyzes the compatibility between USC version 5.0.125
and IPS version 1.0.0.26 The full analysis would cover 23 resource
types, 43 USC profiles, and 26 IPS profiles, but for brevity, we focus
on 3 resources, Patient, Condition, and MedicationRequest.
To accelerate the analysis, a script was written to compare
sender and receiver SDs focused on differences that affect interoper-
ability (as discussed under Feasibility of Exchange). The FHIR Vali-
dator has similar capabilities but highlights differences not relevant
to interoperability analysis and does not analyze interactions
between nested elements. Invariants were left out of scope of the
analysis.
Example 1: US Core (sender) to International Patient
Summary (receiver)
The first example considers USC as the sender and IPS as the receiver,
a scenario that could arise in international pandemic response or
worldwide study of rare diseases. It is assumed that sender resources
conform to a USC profile and the receiver validates against corre-
sponding IPS profile(s). The first 2 columns of the FHIT (Table 2) are
populated from USC’s CS.27 The third column represents the catch-
ments of profiles in column 2, populated from profile descriptions.
The fourth column lists the IPS profiles that correspond to those
catchments, and the fifth are the catchments of the IPS profiles.
For Patient, there is one USC profile whose catchment is all US
patients. The IPS profile applies to all patients. IPS patient requires a
birth date, but USC does not, so this exchange is potentially infeasible.
Additionally, contact.relationship has different value sets, and
the IPS binding is required. Where there are semantically equivalent
codes (eg, N [next-of-kin] and FAMMEB [family member]), a poten-
tial workaround is to send both USC and IPS codes, but this requires
the server awareness of the receiver requirements. The USC binding of
communication.language is extensible, and the IPS binding is
required, so this element is also potentially infeasible even though the
USC value set is a subset of the IPS value set.
For Condition, there are 2 profiles in USC, one for encounter
diagnoses and the other for problems and health concerns. There is
a single IPS profile that applies to all conditions. Both exchanges are
potentially infeasible for several reasons, for example, clinical-
Status is optional in USC but required in IPS; IPS attempts to
restrict the data types of onset[x] and abatement[x]; cate-
gory has extensible bindings to value sets with similar codes, but
from different code systems.
For MedicationRequest, there is one USC profile and one IPS
profile. USC’s catchment includes patient-reported medications,28
Table 1. Feasibility of exchange with different versions of the same
SD
Version compatibility
between SDs
Sender SD version
(vs receiver)
Feasibility
of exchange
Backward and forward
Either older or newer
Feasible
Forward only
Older
Potentially infeasible
Newer
Feasible
Backward only
Older
Feasible
Newer
Potentially infeasible
Neither backward
nor forward
Either older or newer
Potentially infeasible
4
JAMIA Open, 2023, Vol. 6, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamiaopen/article/6/1/ooad001/7030744 by guest on 21 March 2026
but in IPS, reported medications are represented by Medication-
Statement resources. If IPS receives a MedicationRequest where
reported is true (indicating indirect knowledge), it can be rejected
for using the wrong base resource. In fact, all MedicationRequests
could be rejected, since IPS does not require support of this resource.
Example 2: Simultaneous support of US Core and
International Patient Summary
A related question is whether an FHIR sender could simultaneously
implement both USC and IPS. This involves using the catchments
already aligned in the FHIT and evaluating the feasibility of the
intersection profiles.
As discussed, IPS patient requires a birth date, so the intersection
profile requires it. For contact.relationship, the required IPS
value set must be used but all terms therein qualify as valid exten-
sions to the USC set. Although there is no conflict, terms appearing
in USC but not in IPS, for example, employer, cannot be expressed.
With these reservations, a common patient profile between USC and
IPS is feasible.
For Condition, there are 2 intersections, corresponding to the 2
profiles in USC. Both require clinicalStatus and subjec-
t.reference, restrict the types for onset[x] and abate-
ment[x] to dateTime or Period, and must take a category code
from USC.
As discussed above, simultaneous support of patient medications
is infeasible because USC and IPS use different base resources.
DISCUSSION
After 10 years of development and 4 (going on 5) major versions of
FHIR, users are still being cautioned that there are “many uninvesti-
gated issues associated with this use [of supported] profiles.”29 One
missing piece is the ability to define which resources should conform
to which profile. This article has shown that FHIR compatibility
between senders and receivers implementing different IGs cannot be
based solely on the information contained in profiles. Until comput-
able catchments are developed, human interpretation of profile nar-
ratives is necessary to determine what profiles are intended to
represent.
Defining computable catchments for profiles may appear to be a
circular problem, since a catchment is a region of information space,
and in FHIR, regions of information space are represented as pro-
files. Nonetheless, there could be an algorithmic relationship
between particular values and a given profile. An example is an
association between a LOINC30 code and an Observation profile.
Ideally, the catchment would be a function that accepts information
in FHIR-compatible form and returns true only if the profile applies.
Potentially, FHIRPath31 could serve this purpose. The potential
advantage of FHIRPath is that it contains functions that invoke ter-
minology services to translate codes between code systems and to
test subsumption relationships. Another potential solution is cap-
tured in an experimental FHIR R5 profile mapping extension.32
This extension defines a relationship between a search string and a
profile. A resource that would fit the search string would be
expected to conform to the named profile. A third possibility is to
use a distinct profile to define the catchment. The catchment profile
would not define the target representation of the data, but only the
characteristics that would trigger the use of the associated data pro-
file. It remains to be seen which of these proposals best mitigates the
problem of profile applicability.
CONCLUSION
This article introduced a method and criteria for interoperability in
FHIR systems that involve different FHIR versions, resources, and
profiles. Given the growth in the number of IGs and the existence of
several major FHIR versions, the need for compatibility analysis has
become critical. Although tooling currently lags, once profiles are
manually aligned according to their catchments, the remainder of
the analysis can be automated.
To be clear, the issue of infeasibility in FHIR systems does not
arise unless SDs are enforced. It is easier to exchange data if SDs are
not enforced, but then exchange participants should be prepared to
process resources of all kinds. The motivation behind IGs is to
impose greater uniformity. If compliance is not expected or
required, IGs do not add much value.
Although the significance of intersection profiles was noted in
previous
studies,
some
details
were
overlooked.
Considering
Table 2. Sample rows from the FHIT for US Core (sender) to IPS (receiver)
Sender base
resource
Sender SD
Sender catchment
Receiver SD
Receiver catchment
Conclusion
Short explanation
Patient
US Core Patient
Patients in US realm
Patient (IPS)
Patients in universal
realm
Potentially
infeasible
birthDate is required
in IPS but not in
USC
Condition
US Core Condition
Encounter Diagno-
sis
Encounter diagnoses
Condition (IPS)
All conditions
Potentially
infeasible
clinicalStatus is
required in IPS but
not in USC
US Core Condition
Problems and
Health Concerns
Conditions
“categorized as a
problem or health
concern. . .”
Condition (IPS)
All conditions
Potentially
infeasible
clinicalStatus is
required in IPS but
not in USC
Medication
request
US Core Medication
Request
All patient medica-
tions, past, present,
planned, prescribed
or not, including
reported medica-
tions
Medication Statement
(IPS)
Record of medication
being taken by a
patient
Infeasible
Different base
resource
Medication Request
(base resource)
Prescriptions
Potentially
infeasible
Feasible only if
receiver supports
the MedicationRe-
quest resource
JAMIA Open, 2023, Vol. 6, No. 1
5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamiaopen/article/6/1/ooad001/7030744 by guest on 21 March 2026
intersection profiles without consideration of catchments does not
yield useful results. For now, human input is needed to determine
catchments based on narrative descriptions. In the future, FHIRPath
expressions, catchment profiles, or query strings could be employed
to express computable catchments in a form amenable to computa-
tion.
FUNDING
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the pub-
lic, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MAK: primary author and corresponding author. CM: coauthor.
Both the primary author and coauthor claim substantial contribu-
tions to the conception or design of the work, drafting the work or
revising it critically for important intellectual content, final approval
of the version to be published, and agree to be accountable for all
aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accu-
racy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investi-
gated and resolved.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
None declared.
DATA AVAILABILITY
All data are incorporated into the article.
REFERENCES
1.
Health Level Seven International. HL7 FHIR Release 4B. 2022. https://
hl7.org/fhir/R4B. Accessed July 8, 2022.
2.
Firely. Simpliﬁer.net: Where FHIR Proﬁles are Published. 2019. https://
simpliﬁer.net/. Accessed July 8, 2022.
3.
Health Level Seven International. FHIR Conformance Rules. 2022.
https://hl7.org/fhir/R4B/conformance-rules.html#2.1.0. Accessed July 8,
2022.
4.
AEGIS.net, Inc. The Touchstone Platform for HL7
V
R FHIR
V
R. 2022. https://
www.aegis.net/touchstone/. Accessed July 2, 2022.
5.
MITRE Corporation. FHIR Crucible. 2016. https://github.com/fhir-cruci-
ble. Accessed July 14, 2022.
6.
The Ofﬁce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technol-
ogy. Inferno. 2022. https://inferno.healthit.gov. Accessed July 8, 2022.
7.
Health Level Seven International. FHIR Resource StructureDeﬁnition.
2022.
https://www.hl7.org/fhir/R4B/structuredeﬁnition.html.
Accessed
July 7, 2022.
8.
Health Level Seven International. Using the FHIR Validator. 2022. https://
conﬂuence.hl7.org/display/FHIR/Using+the+FHIR+Validator/.
Accessed
July 11 , 2022.
9.
Kramer MA. Interoperability of FHIR Proﬁles. 2016. https://lightmyfhir.
org/2016/04/05/interoperability-of-fhir-proﬁles/. Accessed July 2, 2022.
10. Kramer MA, Hadley M, Mathews J, et al. FHIR proﬁling strategies for
interoperability. In: 16th International HL7 Interoperability Conference
(IHIC 2016); June 13–15, 2016; Genoa, Italy.
11. Health Level Seven International. Device Metric Observation Proﬁle.
2022. https://www.hl7.org/fhir/observation-core.html. Accessed July 12,
2022.
12. Health Level Seven International. Supporting Multiple Proﬁles. 2022.
https://www.hl7.org/fhir/R4B/proﬁling.html#mixing. Accessed July
2,
2022.
13. Health Level Seven International. FHIR Binding Strengths. 2022. https://
www.hl7.org/fhir/R4B/valueset-binding-strength.html. Accessed July 11,
2022.
14. Health Level Seven International. US Core Resource Proﬁle: Medication
List.
2022.
https://www.hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU5.0.1/medication-list.
html. Accessed July 6, 2022.
15. Health Level Seven International. International Patient Summary Proﬁle:
Device (Performer, Observer). 2022. https://hl7.org/fhir/uv/ips/STU1/
StructureDeﬁnition-Device-observer-uv-ips.html. Accessed July 18, 2022.
16. Health Level Seven International. US Core Resource Proﬁle: Implantable
Device. 2022. https://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU5.0.1/StructureDeﬁnition-
us-core-implantable-device.html. Accessed July 20, 2022.
17. Health Level Seven International. Extension: maxValueSet. 2022. http://
hl7.org/fhir/R4B/extension-elementdeﬁnition-maxvalueset.html.
Accessed
November 10, 2022.
18. Health Level Seven International. FHIR Implementation Guide: Military
Service History and Status STU 1 Ballot. 2021. https://hl7.org/fhir/us/mili-
tary-service/2021Sep/. Accessed July 19, 2022.
19. Health Level Seven International. Personal Health Device Implementation
Guide STU 1. 2022. https://hl7.org/fhir/uv/phd/STU1/. Accessed July 20,
2022.
20. Heidel S. Backward vs. Forward Compatibility. 2020. https://stevenheidel.
medium.com/backward-vs-forward-compatibility-9c03c3db15c9. Accessed
July 8, 2022.
21. Health Level Seven International. FHIR Resource CapabilityStatement.
2022. https://www.hl7.org/fhir/R4B/capabilitystatement.html. Accessed
July 19, 2022.
22. Health Level Seven International. FHIR Resource CapabilityStatement:
Supported Proﬁle Deﬁnition. 2022. https://www.hl7.org/fhir/R4B/capabi-
litystatement-deﬁnitions.html#CapabilityStatement.rest.resource.suppor-
tedProﬁle. Accessed July 19, 2022.
23. Health Level Seven International. FHIR Public Test Servers. 2022. https://
conﬂuence.hl7.org/display/FHIR/Public+Test+Servers. Accessed July 13,
2022.
24. Ofﬁce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology
(ONC). HealthIT.gov. 2020. https://www.healthit.gov/topic/health-it-
and-health-information-exchange-basics/what-hie/.
Accessed
July
8,
2022.
25. Health Level Seven International. US Core Implementation Guide Version
5.0.1. 2022. https://www.hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU5.0.1/. Accessed July
12, 2022.
26. Health Level Seven International. International Patient Summary Imple-
mentation Guide Version 1.0.0. 2022. https://hl7.org/fhir/uv/ips/STU1/.
Accessed July 14, 2022.
27. Health Level Seven International. US Core Server CapabilityStatement.
2022.
https://www.hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU5.0.1/CapabilityStatement-
us-core-server.html. Accessed July 19, 2022.
28. Health Level Seven International. US Core Implementation Guide Medi-
cation List Guidance. 2022. https://www.hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU5.0.1/
medication-list.html. Accessed July 11, 2022.
29. Health Level Seven International. Proﬁling FHIR. 2022. http://hl7.org/
fhir/R4B/proﬁling.html. Accessed November 10, 2022.
30. Forrey AW, McDonald CJ, DeMoor G, et al. Logical observation identi-
ﬁer names and codes (LOINC) database: a public use set of codes and
names for electronic reporting of clinical laboratory test results. Clin
Chem 1996; 42 (1): 81–90.
31. Health Level Seven International. FHIRPath Normative Release (v2.0.0).
2020. https://hl7.org/fhirpath/N1/. Accessed July 14, 2022.
32. Health Level Seven International. FHIR Tooling Extensions IG (v0.1.0).
2022.
http://build.fhir.org/ig/FHIR/fhir-tools-ig/StructureDeﬁntion-pro-
ﬁle-mapping.html. Accessed November 8, 2022.
6
JAMIA Open, 2023, Vol. 6, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamiaopen/article/6/1/ooad001/7030744 by guest on 21 March 2026
