ISSN 2522-9400             European Modern Studies Journal                     Vol 7 No 6 
available at www.journal-ems.com 
DOI: 10.59573/emsj.7(6).2023.23 
 
225 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
HAPI-FHIR Server Implementation to Enhancing Interoperability among Primary 
Care Health Information Systems in Sri Lanka: Review of the Technical Use Case 
 
Prabath Jayathissa[1], Roshan Hewapathrana[2] 
[1]Postgraduate Institute of Medicine, University of Colombo, Sri Lanka 
 [2]Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, Sri Lanka 
 
Abstract. This comprehensive review underscores the paramount importance of 
interoperability within the digital health landscape, emphasizing the necessity for a 
standardized framework to facilitate effective communication among healthcare professionals 
and institutions. The primary focus of this discourse centres on implementing a Fast Healthcare 
Interoperability Resources (FHIR) server, recognised as a pivotal solution addressing technical, 
semantic, and process interoperability failures. This standardised framework ensures 
uniformity and facilitates efficient communication and real-time data access within Primary 
Care Health Information Systems (HIS). The adaptability and scalability inherent in FHIR play 
a critical role in supporting the dynamic needs of healthcare systems, fostering interoperability, 
and enabling integration across diverse components. The narrative delves into the complexities 
of patient data management, accentuating the pivotal role of semantic interoperability in 
ensuring the seamless continuation of patient care. The transition from paper-based 
documentation to repository storage necessitates effective data retrieval through clinical 
correlation, emphasising presenting health data in a manner aligned with clinical findings—an 
innovative concept introduced as a health-aware presentation. Integrating FHIR standards 
amplifies these efforts, enriching multiple pathways for data search and retrieval. This 
interconnectedness not only fosters efficient interoperability within healthcare institutions but 
also facilitates a comprehensive approach to accessing health data across diverse organizations. 
The FHIR server implementation project, guided by the principles of the ADR method, 
systematically addresses challenges associated with patient identity criteria, biometrics, and 
data security, demonstrating a steadfast commitment to inclusive and patientcentric care. The 
detailed exploration of the development phases of the FHIR server implementation accentuates 
the significance of architecture design, API integration, and security measures. The concluding 
stages underscore a forward-looking approach, incorporating HHIMS Synthetic Dataset testing 
for future utilization. Ultimately, positioning the integration of an FHIR server in Primary Care 
HIS as a transformative step, this abstract envisions the fostering of a dynamic and responsive 
healthcare information environment harmonizing with the evolving landscape of digital health. 
Keywords: HAPI-FHIR Server, Interoperability, Primary Care Health Information 
Systems, Health Information Systems 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Primary Care Health Information Systems in Sri Lankan 
In Sri Lanka, the government health care system encompasses various service deliveries, 
including administration, training, curative care, public health, and resource management 
programs. The curative care component involves hospitals categorized based on resource 
allocation and availability. Teaching hospitals, provincial general and district general hospitals, 
special care units, and rehabilitation units fall under the line ministry, which serves as the core 
of the health ministry. Other hospitals are affiliated with provincial councils under the 
provincial health ministry (Ministry of Health, Nutrition and Indigenous Medicine - Sri Lanka, 
2017). 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
226 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
The curative sector operates on a referral system, directing patients from primary to 
tertiary care institutions. This system aims to ensure the sustainability of healthcare delivery, 
minimizing delays for both paediatric and adult populations. The public sector provides 95% 
of inpatient care, while the private sector is responsible for the remaining 5% However, the 
referral system doesn’t prevent direct engagement with private practices or admission to private 
hospitals (Ministry of Health - Sri Lanka, 2018). Primary Care Health Information Systems in 
Sri Lanka play a pivotal role in the country’s healthcare landscape, serving as the foundation 
for the delivery of essential and preventive healthcare services. These systems encompass a 
range of technological tools and platforms designed to manage, store, and exchange patient 
information within the primary care setting. Understanding the dynamics of these information 
systems is crucial for effective healthcare delivery and the overarching goal of improving 
population health in Sri Lanka (Perera et al., 2019). 
Primary care health information systems in Sri Lanka play a crucial role in modern 
healthcare delivery. These systems, primarily based on electronic health records (EHRs), 
centralize patient information, including medical history, treatment plans, and diagnostic data. 
The digitalization of records improves accessibility and facilitates coordinated care among 
healthcare providers (Al-Sahan & Saddik, 2016). Efficient appointment scheduling and 
workflow management are integral components, ensuring organized and patient-friendly 
healthcare experiences. Health data interoperability is emphasized, allowing seamless 
exchange among different facilities for comprehensive patient care. Integration of telemedicine 
solutions enables remote consultations and enhances accessibility, particularly in remote or 
underserved areas (Yuksel et al., 2016). 
These systems contribute to public health initiatives by supporting surveillance and 
reporting. They monitor disease trends, identify outbreaks, and aid in implementing preventive 
measures. Robust data security measures prioritize patient confidentiality and compliance with 
national and international standards. Decision support systems enhance clinical decision-
making, providing alerts for medication interactions, reminders for preventive care, and access 
to evidence-based guidelines. Understanding these functionalities and addressing challenges is 
crucial for policymakers, healthcare providers, and technology developers as primary care 
health information systems continue to shape the future of healthcare delivery in Sri Lanka 
(Jayathissa, Vajira, & Roshan, 2017a). 
The concept of universal healthcare, rooted in history, led to global initiatives like WHO. 
In Sri Lanka, Primary Healthcare Reform addresses challenges, emphasizing the Primary Care 
System Strengthening Project (PSSP). PSSP aims to improve primary healthcare utilization, 
focusing on health information system interoperability. The Cluster Master Patient Index is 
proposed for sharing records. The project includes implementing a Health Information 
Management System and a Personal Health Records system (Ministry of Health - Sri Lanka, 
2018). The Sri Lanka Essential Service Package ensures citizens receive services, emphasizing 
preventive care and strengthening referrals. The empanelment of citizens into clusters ensures 
a concise health record, promoting continuity of care. Overall, these initiatives drive universal 
health coverage in Sri Lanka. 
According to Sri Lanka’s constitution, anyone in the country can receive treatment at any 
hospital, with free healthcare services accessible nationwide. However, patient bypassing 
primary care institutes creates unnecessary resource competition at secondary levels. The 
Essential Service Package (ESP) acts as a gatekeeper for referrals, aiming to strengthen 
Primary Medical Care Institutions (PMCI) credibility and attract patients (Ministry of Health - 
Sri Lanka, 2018). A quality referral system requires standardized processes, appropriate 
education for healthcare professionals, and supervision for adherence. Effective referrals 
involve prompt and respectful patient treatment at PMCI, and decision-making is based on 
analysed clinical signs. Despite patient autonomy, clear referral letters facilitate seamless 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
227 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
communication for timely attention at the receiving institute (Jayathissa & Hewapathirana, 
2023b). 
 
Hapi-FHIR Server 
Although the health information systems were set up like mushrooms, came to this 
research with a strong understanding of the effects that patients may face due to the lack of 
interactions between health information systems (Jayathissa & Hewapathirana, 2023c; 
Jayathissa, Vajira, & Roshan, 2017a). To improve the continuation of care, universal care 
coverage should be established. To achieve universal health care coverage, the lack of 
interaction between health information systems should be overcome with health information 
system interoperability. Then the health records are shared among the primary and secondary 
care. The primary healthcare strengthening project is the first attempt to achieve universal 
healthcare through health information system interoperability. To bridge the gap, the perfect 
solution could be the interoperability service (Jayathissa & Hewapathirana, 2023a). 
With the establishment of the Essential Service Package (ESP) in 2018, primary health 
care reached a unique level. With the introduction of ESP, patients are empanelled into clusters, 
which are designed to provide the best possible care for patients. Still, it is felt that the primary 
health information systems are not interoperable with each other to ensure that services are 
properly accessed (Jayathissa et al., 2018). 
In the dynamic landscape of healthcare, achieving interoperability among primary care 
health information systems is paramount to enhance the overall quality of patient care and 
streamline healthcare processes. This document explores the implementation of the Health 
Level Seven International’s (HL7) Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) standard 
within the context of Sri Lanka’s primary care health systems. Specifically, it delves into the 
HAPIFHIR Server Implementation, evaluating its effectiveness in fostering interoperability 
and facilitating seamless data exchange among diverse health information systems. Through 
an in-depth review of the technical use case, this study aims to provide valuable insights into 
the practical applications, challenges, and potential benefits of adopting HAPIFHIR within the 
unique healthcare ecosystem of Sri Lanka. As we navigate this exploration, we seek to unravel 
the transformative potential of this implementation, ultimately contributing to the advancement 
of interoperable and patient-centric healthcare solutions in the region (Jayathissa, Vajira, & 
Roshan, 2017a). 
The evolution of healthcare systems globally has underscored the critical importance of 
interoperability, as it empowers healthcare providers with the ability to access, share, and 
utilize patient information seamlessly. In the context of Sri Lanka’s primary care health 
information systems, the HAPI-FHIR Server Implementation emerges as a promising avenue 
to address interoperability challenges. This document embarks on a comprehensive 
examination of the technical use case of the HAPI-FHIR Server Implementation in the Sri 
Lankan healthcare landscape. The review not only scrutinizes the intricacies of the 
implementation but also aims to shed light on the contextual nuances and specific requirements 
of primary care health systems in Sri Lanka. By investigating the alignment of HAPI-FHIR 
with the unique challenges faced by the Sri Lankan healthcare ecosystem, this study seeks to 
provide actionable insights that can inform decision-makers, developers, and stakeholders. The 
discussion on interoperability in Sri Lanka’s health information systems began in 2017, with 
the proposal to interconnect these systems. The Master Patient Index (MPI) emerged as a 
suitable tool for serving as the integration layer for this task. The MPI, with its various 
functionalities, particularly its role in interoperability via messaging, was identified as a key 
element in this effort. Development efforts were underway to achieve interoperability using the 
microservice architecture mentioned in the 2017 paper (Jayathissa & Hewapathirana, 2023a; 
Jayathissa, Dissanayake, & Hewapathirana, 2018; Jayathissa et al., 2023). 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
228 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
Patient matching is a critical function of the MPI, and the use of probabilistic matching 
helps prevent duplications. The development of management capacity and improvement in 
electronic communication were identified as factors that could streamline and standardize 
electronic communication in health information systems (Jayathissa & Hewapathirana, 2022; 
Jayathissa, Vajira, & Roshan, 2017a). As technology, particularly the internet and information 
communication technologies, continues to advance, the adoption of e-health initiatives is 
expected to transform traditional healthcare systems globally. This transformation aims to 
reduce medical errors, enhance healthcare quality, minimize costs, and empower clients to 
actively engage in their healthcare decisions. 
For successful interoperability among health information systems, effective 
communication channels are crucial. The MPI is recognized globally as a primary tool for 
interconnecting health information systems. Implementing the MPI is seen as instrumental in 
achieving interoperability among health records in the context of primary healthcare reform. 
The MPI is envisioned to play a pivotal role in achieving cluster-based referral governance 
through system interoperability, making it a key element in the quest for interoperability in 
healthcare information systems (HL7, 2014; Marceglia et al., 2015). As we navigate through 
the technical intricacies of the HAPI-FHIR Server Implementation, it becomes imperative to 
explore how this framework facilitates data exchange, supports standardized data formats, and 
promotes a patientcentric approach to healthcare. Additionally, the document will delve into 
potential challenges and considerations associated with the integration of HAPI-FHIR within 
the Sri Lankan context (HL7, 2017; Hussain, Langer, & Kohli, 2018; University Health 
Network, 2018). 
In essence, this review not only serves as a technical evaluation but also as a roadmap for 
enhancing interoperability among primary care health information systems in Sri Lanka. By 
critically assessing the HAPI-FHIR Server Implementation and its alignment with the unique 
needs of the region, we aspire to contribute to the ongoing discourse on leveraging technology 
for improved healthcare delivery and patient outcomes (Hussain, Langer, & Kohli, 2018). 
Beyond the technical intricacies, this document also explores the broader implications of 
implementing HAPI-FHIR in the Sri Lankan healthcare landscape. It delves into the potential 
impact on data security, privacy considerations, and the overall governance framework required 
for sustaining a robust interoperable ecosystem (HL7, 2014). Furthermore, the review seeks to 
assess the scalability of the HAPI-FHIR Server Implementation, considering the diverse and 
evolving needs of primary care health systems in Sri Lanka. Understanding how this solution 
adapts to changing healthcare requirements and accommodates future advancements is crucial 
for its long-term viability and success (Hussain, Langer, & Kohli, 2018; Pimenta et al., 2023). 
An integral part of this exploration involves examining the collaborative potential of 
HAPI-FHIR, both within and beyond national borders. Given the increasing importance of 
cross-border healthcare collaborations and the global nature of health challenges, 
understanding how HAPI-FHIR supports interoperability on an international scale becomes 
pivotal. Additionally, the document aims to highlight any success stories or best practices 
emerging from the implementation of HAPI-FHIR in primary care settings. Real-world 
examples of improved patient outcomes, streamlined workflows, and enhanced data-driven 
decision-making can serve as compelling evidence for the efficacy of this implementation, 
providing valuable insights for other regions contemplating similar endeavours (Soares, Essaid, 
& Kahn, 2023). 
In conclusion, this review aspires to offer a comprehensive understanding of the HAPI-
FHIR Server Implementation’s impact on interoperability among primary care health 
information systems in Sri Lanka. By navigating through technical nuances, addressing 
contextual challenges, and envisioning the broader implications, this document seeks to 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
229 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
contribute to the ongoing dialogue on advancing healthcare through innovative and 
interoperable solutions in the Sri Lankan context. 
 
Methods 
The research method involves a systematic approach aimed at achieving a comprehensive 
understanding and successful implementation of the intended objectives. To begin, the research 
objective is clearly defined: to implement the HAPIFHIR server for enhancing interoperability 
among Primary Care Health Information Systems (HIS). This serves as the guiding principle 
throughout the research process. 
In the pursuit of enhancing interoperability through HAPI-FHIR server implementation, 
conducting a comprehensive literature search is imperative to gather insights from relevant 
research articles. Leveraging academic databases such as PubMed, IEEE Xplore, 
ScienceDirect, and Google Scholar can serve as a starting point. Employing keywords like 
"HAPI-FHIR," "FHIR Server Implementation," and "Interoperability" with Boolean operators 
helps refine the search. Filtering results by publication date ensures access to the latest 
information, while review articles offer comprehensive overviews. Examining citations in 
relevant articles and exploring journals, conferences, government websites, and professional 
associations in healthcare informatics can unveil valuable sources. Collaboration with 
librarians can further enhance the search strategy. Critical evaluation of the identified articles 
for relevance and quality is crucial for obtaining meaningful insights into the topic. As the 
search query ("HAPI-FHIR" OR "Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources") AND ("Server 
Implementation" OR "Implementation Strategies") AND ("Interoperability" OR "Health 
Information Exchange") were been used. 
A crucial step involves conducting an extensive literature review focusing on FHIR 
standards, interoperability in healthcare, and existing implementations. This review aims to 
identify challenges and gaps within current systems, providing a foundation for the subsequent 
research phases. Defining the system requirements comes next, involving the specification of 
both functional and non-functional requirements based on the identified gaps and challenges. 
This step ensures a clear roadmap for the implementation process. The selection of 
representative Primary Care HIS for integration follows, considering factors such as user base, 
data complexity, and system architecture. This step is pivotal in ensuring the practical relevance 
and applicability of the research outcomes. 
The actual implementation phase involves configuring the HAPI-FHIR server to meet 
the defined requirements and ensuring compatibility with the selected Primary Care HIS. 
Additionally, strategies for data mapping and transformation are developed to address issues 
related to data types, formats, and standards. Security measures are implemented to ensure the 
confidentiality and integrity of patient data during interoperability, aligning with healthcare 
data protection standards. Rigorous testing, including unit tests, integration tests, and end-to-
end tests, is then conducted to validate the functionality and interoperability of the implemented 
HAPI-FHIR server. User feedback is collected from healthcare professionals and IT staff to 
assess the usability and effectiveness of the HAPI-FHIR implementation. Performance 
evaluation follows, focusing on aspects such as response times, data throughput, and system 
resource utilization. A scalability assessment is conducted to evaluate the system’s capability 
to accommodate an increasing number of users and data volume. Subsequently, a cost-benefit 
analysis is performed to assess the HAPI-FHIR implementation's economic feasibility 
compared to the enhanced interoperability (Pimenta et al., 2023; Soares, Essaid, & Kahn, 2023; 
Yuksel et al., 2016). 
Thorough documentation of the entire implementation process, including configurations, 
codebases, and integration protocols, is undertaken. Ethical considerations related to patient 
data privacy, consent, and compliance with healthcare regulations are addressed throughout the 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
230 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
research process. In conclusion, the research findings are summarized, conclusions are drawn 
regarding the effectiveness of the HAPI-FHIR implementation, and recommendations are 
provided for future improvements. This comprehensive research method ensures a systematic 
and thorough exploration of the HAPI-FHIR server’s role in enhancing interoperability among 
Primary Care Health Information Systems. 
For information system development has two basic missions to complete to achieve the 
successful product and implementation. First mission is contribution to the theoretical aspect 
of the research and second aspect is how to show the problems of the system using the current 
practices. For system development and implementation, the action research (AR) and the 
design research (DR) methods being used. In the design research, the new design is developed 
and the action research solves an immediate organizational problem. To make a product as 
successful one researcher has to put the theory into practice in a practical way. The design 
research and the action research work in a similar way. Designing the master patient index is a 
DR and the implementation in the health care setting is an AR. ADR method “IT artifact is 
built and evaluate in an organizational setting using a general prescriptive design”. The research 
project is a qualitative research. I used action design research (ADR) as the method for HAPI-
FHIR Server Implementation (Jayathissa, Vajira, & Roshan, 2017b). 
ADR method “IT artifact is built and evaluate in an organizational setting using a general 
prescriptive design”. This deals with 3 main areas of the IT artifact development. 1st problem 
formulation process using the design research (DR) method .2nd Evaluation using DR method. 
3rd and final are the artifact building. As according to the ADR method research project is 
carried out in 3 phases. In the phase 1 problem formulation done. Phase 2 building, intervention 
and evaluation process for the MPI Architecture. At the final phase developing the system after 
formalization of what learn from the previous phases. In the phase 1 data collection using focus 
groups, discussion and analysis of its result will be done in order to identify data elements and 
user requirements of MPI prototype. Phase 2 involves in identify the suitable API model for 
the proposed MPI. Phase 3 is developing a prototype MPI using the identified user 
requirements. 
In the phase 1 did the problem formulation. During this phase practical, inspired research 
principal used. In this phase viewing the field problem and knowledge gathering and creating 
opportunities is the main target. Opportunity is the intersection of technical and organizational 
domains. Action design researcher will get the knowledge to apply to set of problems to solve 
the problem. This was carried out using Qualitative research design. Formative evaluation be 
applied to the qualitative research design. The research did on the staff members who are 
involved in the use of the HHIMS/HIMS health information system in the relevant respective 
hospitals (Base Hospital Panadura, Base Hospital Horana, Base Hospital Homagama, Base 
Hospital Avissawella, District hospital Dompe, Cancer Institute Maharagama) of two districts 
(Colombo and Kalutara). The sampling method is Convenient sampling method is chosen 
mainly because of the limited resources and time. Study instruments Semi-Structured 
interviews for HHIMS/HIMS users. Focus group discussions and interviews with, 
HHIMS/HIMS users and Software Development group team. Interviews and Focus group 
discussion (FGD) conducted by the principal investigator with the help of supervisors. Data 
recording was done correctly. Randomly selection of participants/groups for FGD was done. 
FGD was done following an unstructured interview at the beginning, and then semi-structured 
questions was created to ask later by avoiding the unimportant issues arrived at the earlier 
conversation. 
After taking permission from the relevant authorities the principal investigator 
introduced himself to the staff at the above relevant respective hospital of Colombo and 
Kalutara district and explain the research and the methodology to the eligible participants of 
the research. Informed consent was obtained from the eligible participants after explaining the 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
231 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
full investigation procedure including benefits and risks. An adequate time allowed for them to 
clarify any query or further questions. Informing them that they can withdraw from the study 
at any time without giving any reason and no further correspondence made ensures voluntary 
participation. 
Data from interviews analysed using qualitative methods to find relevant concepts related 
to the implementation. Collected ideas recorded using computer software. These recoded data 
used to identify themes, Concepts, requirements of the users. Research did not involve 
collecting personal identification information of participants during data collection. Therefore, 
privacy and confidentiality of the participants are preserved. Ethical approval has detained from 
the ethics review committee PGIM, University of Colombo. Before collecting data from health 
institutions necessary permission gained from the head of the institutes. Informed written 
consent taken from the participants. Privacy, security, and confidentiality of data assured. The 
purpose of the research and publication would not involve using any personally identifiable 
data of anybody or there is no possible access the system or its data by third parties because all 
data gathering would be done by researcher’s personal computer. 
Phase 2: During the implementation phase of the HAPI FHIR server, the focus shifted 
towards the design cycle of the IT artifact. This involved the creation of a design architecture 
integral to the development process. Collaborative efforts from domain experts were employed 
to formulate a plan for the architectural design. The development adhered to three fundamental 
principles, initiating with the construction of the architectural design. Subsequently, 
interventions were introduced to assess the suitability of the design. The evaluation phase, 
conducted at the conclusion, leveraged a literature review of existing systems as a tool for 
comprehensive assessment. In the initial design phase, the research team meticulously crafted 
the Alpha-version of the HAPI FHIR server architecture. Following a comprehensive literature 
review and extensive discussions with the development team, the beta version of the design 
was meticulously formulated. 
Advancing into Phase 3, the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) commenced, 
embracing the Scrum software development practice for the effective implementation of the 
HAPI FHIR server. The agile methodology of Scrum ensured the delivery of software program 
deliverables at the conclusion of each software development phase, providing transparency for 
the researcher and delivering incremental progress every two weeks. The Scrum procedure in 
Phase 3 encompassed crucial steps. A comprehensive work list was established, driven by the 
researcher’s features derived from the Phase 1 requirement document. Tasks were meticulously 
estimated, prioritized, and organized into sprints—two-week periods dedicated to task delivery. 
Sprint meetings discussed tasks at the beginning, and deliverables were provided at the end, 
accompanied by plans for subsequent sprints. 
Implementation steps for the HAPI FHIR server involved configuring the server based 
on the designed architecture, developing APIs, and defining core interactions and message 
types between the electronic health record and the HAPI FHIR server. This phase also 
witnessed the creation of a mechanism for incorporating a unique identification number into 
the HAPI FHIR server, enhancing its functionality. The agile approach was wholeheartedly 
embraced by the software development team at ICTA, ensuring continuous and incremental 
progress. A designated software team leader took charge, and the scrum procedure was initiated 
after the full requirement document was meticulously finalized. Testing of the message 
architecture involved using the prototype HAPI FHIR server and electronic health records, a 
process meticulously conducted by the development team. Throughout the development 
journey, the team adhered to a stringent schedule, with separate teams dedicated to software 
development, testing, and security. The iterative process included development, rigorous 
testing, and the implementation of robust security measures at each software deliverable, 
ensuring a systematic, secure, and successful implementation of the HAPI FHIR server. 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
232 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
Results 
In the initial design phase, the research team crafted the Alpha-version of the HAPI FHIR 
server architecture, envisioning a comprehensive FHIR playground using the Docker 
environment. Establishing a HAPI FHIR server within a Dockerized environment involves 
encapsulating the server in a Docker container and configuring it for seamless execution. This 
process commences by composing a Dockerfile, specifying instructions such as utilizing a Java 
base image, setting the working directory, and integrating the HAPI FHIR server JAR file into 
the container. Subsequently, the Docker image is built, assigning a relevant tag. Upon 
successful image construction, the Docker container is executed, mapping the local machine’s 
port 8080 to the container’s port 8080. The operational HAPI FHIR server can then be accessed 
through a web browser at http://localhost:8080/baseDstu3, with adjustments made for the 
specific FHIR version. Custom configurations, if needed, involve incorporating volumes or 
transferring configuration files into the container. This may include copying a customized hapi-
config.properties file and adjusting the CMD instruction in the Dockerfile accordingly. 
Adherence to the HAPI FHIR server documentation for configuration details and version 
specific considerations is crucial, and compliance with licensing agreements is imperative in a 
production environment. 
With experience of the Docker implementation 2nd stage started with implementation 
involved integrating essential components and tools, including specific prerequisites such as 
the Java Development Kit (JDK), Java Authentication and Authorization Service (JAS), 
Apache Maven, Rubz, and Budler. The subsequent steps in the HAPI FHIR server 
implementation encompassed an extensive literature review on FHIR standards, 
interoperability, and existing implementations. Functional and non-functional requirements 
were defined based on identified gaps and challenges. A representative Primary Care Health 
Information System (HIS) was selected for integration, considering user base and system 
architecture. The HAPI FHIR server was then implemented and configured to ensure 
compatibility with the chosen Primary Care HIS. 
Data mapping strategies were developed to address issues related to data types, formats, 
and standards, while security protocols were implemented to ensure data confidentiality and 
integrity during interoperability. Rigorous testing, including unit tests, integration tests, and 
end-to-end tests, was conducted. User feedback was collected from healthcare professionals 
and IT staff to assess usability. The server’s performance was evaluated in terms of response 
times, data throughput, and resource utilization. Scalability was assessed to accommodate an 
increasing number of users and data volume. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted to evaluate 
economic feasibility, and the entire implementation process, including configurations and 
integration protocols, was thoroughly documented. Ethical considerations related to patient 
data privacy, consent, and healthcare regulations were addressed. The findings were 
summarized, conclusions were drawn on the effectiveness of the HAPI FHIR implementation, 
and recommendations were provided for future improvements (Jayathissa, Vajira, & Roshan, 
2017b). 
Simultaneously, the team embarked on building a customized FHIR playground. 
Prerequisites, including JDK, JAS, Apache Maven, Rubz, and Budler, were ensured. The HAPI 
FHIR server was compiled and installed, incorporating necessary tools and ensuring proper 
configuration. This resulted in the establishment of a versatile FHIR playground, allowing 
hands-on exploration of FHIR resources and services. The unique capabilities of HAPI FHIR 
were leveraged to create an interactive environment for experimentation. By following these 
comprehensive steps, the research team successfully implemented the HAPI FHIR server, 
effectively addressing interoperability challenges among Primary Care Health Information 
Systems. The resulting FHIR playground stands as a versatile platform for healthcare 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
233 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
professionals and researchers to explore, test, and enhance interoperability within healthcare 
systems. 
 
Table 1: Steps for HAPI FHIR Server Implementation in Docker 
Step 
Description 
1. Create a 
Dockerfile 
Create a Dockerfile in your project directory. This file will contain 
instructions for building the Docker image. 
FROM openjdk:8-jdk-alpine 
WORKDIR /app 
COPY hapi-fhir-jpaserver-starter.jar /app/hapi-fhir-jpaserver-starter.jar 
EXPOSE 8080 
CMD ["java", "-jar", "hapi-fhir-jpaserver-starter.jar"] 
2. Build the 
Docker 
Image 
Place the HAPI FHIR server JAR file (e.g., hapi-fhir-jpaserver-starter.jar) 
in the same directory as your Dockerfile. Build the Docker image using the 
following command: 
docker build -t hapi-fhir-server . 
This command tags the image as hapi-fhir-server. Adjust the tag as 
needed. 
3. Run the 
Docker 
Container 
Once the image is built, run the Docker container: 
docker run -p 8080:8080 hapi-fhir-server 
This command maps port 8080 on your local machine to port 8080 in the 
Docker container. 
4.Access the 
FHIR 
Server 
The HAPI FHIR server should now be running. Access it by opening a 
web browser and navigating to http://localhost:8080/baseDstu3. Adjust the 
URL based on your FHIR version. 
Note: The actual URL might vary depending on your specific HAPI FHIR 
server configuration. 
5.Custom 
Configuration 
The custom HAPI FHIR server configuration, 1st mount a volume or copy 
configuration files into the Docker container. 
For example, copy a custom hapi-config.properties file into the container: 
COPY hapi-config.properties /app/hapi-config.properties 
Modify the CMD instruction to include the custom 
configuration file: 
CMD ["java", "-jar", "hapi-fhir-jpaserver-starter.jar", 
"–spring.config.location=file:/app/hapi-config.properties"] 
Adjust paths and filenames based on your configuration file. 
Consult the HAPI FHIR server documentation for additional configuration 
or version specific details. Ensure compliance with licensing agreements 
in a production environment. 
 
To build our own FHIR Playground: Ensured the prerequisites were met, including JDK, 
JAS, Apache Maven, Rubz, and Budler. Compiled and installed the HAPI FHIR server, 
incorporating the necessary tools and ensuring proper configuration. Established a customized 
FHIR playground, allowing for hands-on exploration of FHIR resources and services. 
Leveraged the unique capabilities of HAPI FHIR to create an interactive and tailored 
environment for experimentation. JDK (Java Development Kit) was used to ensure the presence 
of a Java Development Kit for Java-based development. JAS (Java Authentication and 
Authorization Service) which sets up Java Authentication and Authorization Service to manage 
authentication and authorization,. Java Application Server and Apache Maven (Java Package 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
234 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
Manager) installed Maven for dependency management and project building. Finally, Rubz 
and Budler used these tools to efficiently handle dependencies and streamline the build process. 
The study focuses on evaluating the capabilities of the HAPI FHIR server within the 
context of healthcare data management systems that integrate FHIR standards. The use of a 
synthetic dataset generated from HHIMS allows for rigorous testing without compromising 
patient confidentiality. The synthetic dataset is carefully crafted to simulate diverse healthcare 
scenarios, providing a representative sample for assessing the server’s performance. The testing 
scenarios include data ingestion, interoperability, security and privacy, and query performance. 
Results indicate commendable performance, showcasing the server’s robustness in handling 
synthetic data, seamless integration with external systems, and adherence to stringent security 
and privacy standards. The conclusion emphasizes the efficacy and reliability of the HAPI 
FHIR server in healthcare data management, positioning it as a valuable asset in the broader 
landscape of health information systems. Further research is suggested to explore nuanced 
aspects of its performance and scalability in diverse healthcare environments. 
 
 
Figure 1: The default index page of a newly installed Apache Tomcat server 
 
Reflection and Learning 
Reflecting on the testing of the HAPI FHIR server using a synthetic dataset from HHIMS 
in two different versions, one within a Docker environment (Version 1) and the other with a 
normal Java-based implementation (Version 2), has provided valuable insights into the server’s 
adaptability, performance, and deployment considerations. In Version 1, the integration of the 
HAPI FHIR server within a Docker environment demonstrated notable advantages in terms of 
portability, scalability, and ease of deployment. Dockerization facilitated a consistent and 
reproducible testing environment, enhancing the server’s compatibility across various systems. 
The encapsulation of the HAPI FHIR server, along with the synthetic dataset, within a Docker 
container streamlined the testing process and mitigated potential compatibility issues with 
different runtime environments. This version highlighted the benefits of containerization in 
achieving a standardized and efficient deployment of the HAPI FHIR server. Conversely, 
Version 2, with a normal Java-based implementation, allowed for a more traditional approach 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
235 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
to deploying the HAPI FHIR server. While lacking the containerization benefits of Version 1, 
this version provided insights into the server’s performance in a non-containerized 
environment. It allowed for a more granular configuration and optimization of the server within 
the Java runtime environment. However, the trade-off was the potential complexity in 
reproducing the exact environment across different systems. 
The synthetic dataset from HHIMS played a crucial role in both versions, serving as a 
standardized and controlled source of data for testing. Its design to emulate realistic healthcare 
scenarios ensured comprehensive evaluations of the HAPI FHIR server’s functionalities, 
including data ingestion, interoperability, security, privacy, and query performance. In 
conclusion, the dual approach of testing the HAPI FHIR server in both Dockerized (Version 
1) and traditional Java-based (Version 2) environments provided a holistic understanding of 
the server’s behaviour and performance characteristics. The Dockerized version showcased the 
advantages of containerization in terms of deployment consistency and scalability, while the 
Java-based version allowed for a detailed examination of server behaviour in a non-
containerized context. This reflection underscores the importance of considering deployment 
strategies based on specific use cases and organizational requirements when implementing the 
HAPI FHIR server. The synthesis of findings from both versions contributes to a 
comprehensive understanding of the server’s capabilities and informs future considerations in 
healthcare data management systems. 
 
 
Figure 2: The default index page of the HAPI FHIR server 
 
In the 21st century the information system diversity is immense and great. The use of 
these greater diverse technologies in the filled of healthcare and medicine becoming more 
commonly. More and more usage of technologies in the different specialties in the healthcare 
domain. These technologies are getting more advance and scalable. Nowadays there is a great 
diversity of information systems within all healthcare providers. Each one with different 
specifications and capabilities as well as communication methods, thus hardly allowing 
scalability. This heterogenic set of characteristics is an impediment to achieve interoperability 
between systems which, indirectly, affects the patients’ well-being. It is common that, upon 
watching each database of each one of these information systems, I notice different entries 
referencing the same person entries with insufficient or wrong data, due to errors or 
miscomprehension upon patient data insertion and outdated data. These problems bring 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
236 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
duplicity, incoherence, lack of actualization and dispersion on patient data. It is with the 
purpose of minimizing these problems that the Master Patient Index Concept is needed. A 
Master Patient Index proposes a centralized repository, to index all patient entries within a pre-
determined set of information systems. This repository is composed by a set of demographic 
data, sufficient to unmistakably identify a person, and a list of identifiers that unequivocally 
identify the several entries that a patient possesses within each information system. This 
solution allows synchronism between all intervenient minimizing incoherence, lack of 
actualization, inexistent data, and diminishing entry duplications. 
In the current health facilities, there is a great diversity of systems of information. Each 
one with different specificities and capacities, Proprietary communications, and hardly allow 
scalability. This set of interoperability of all these systems, in the wealth of the patient. It is 
common practice that, when looking at all the databases of each Information systems, we come 
across different registers the same person; Records with insufficient data, records with incorrect 
data, due to errors or misunderstandings when inserting patient data and records with outdated 
data. These problems cause duplicity, inconsistency, and dispersion in patient data. It is with 
the intention of minimizing these problems that the concept of a Master Patient Index is 
required. A Master Patient Index proposes a centralized repository, which Indexes all patient 
records of a given set of information. A repository which is constituted by a set of demographic 
data, Sufficient to unambiguously identify a person, and a list of identifiers, which identify the 
various records that the patient has in the repositories of each system of information. This 
solution allows synchronization between all the actors, mini-Incoherence, out datedness, lack 
of data, and a Duplication of records. 
The information system development has two basic missions to complete to achieve for 
successful product and implementation.1st mission is contribution to the theoretical aspect of 
the research and 2nd aspect is how to show the problems of the system using the current 
practices. During the development of the prototype MPI researcher gather knowledge about the 
requirement for the MPI. During the designing phase researcher learn the basic design methods 
available for development as well as what was being used in the past for the MPI development 
and implementation through a though literature review. 
In the phase 2 of the development of the prototype MPI researcher studied about the 
monolithic system design and the micro service system design. Decision taken to use both 
micro service and monolithic service system design for the MPI architecture after the 
discussion with the technical experts of prototype development. Unique patient identifier, the 
PHN is introduced to MPI as Primary specific key for all integrations for other health domain 
systems. Developed the suitable API sets which enable the gateway for interoperability of 
health information systems. 
Developing a MPI establishes interoperability of among HHIMS/HIMS systems in Sri 
Lanka. PHN as a unique identification number which integrated the laboratory information 
system (LIS), Picture archival and communication system (PACS), Citizen mobile application 
(CMP) to the public access. Clinical repository or the minimal clinical data set (MCDS) will 
be integrated to the PHN in the version 2 of the MPI. API sets enable interoperability of health 
information system. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
237 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
 
Figure 3: Hapi FHIR with HHIMS Synthetic Data set.png 
 
Discussion 
In the realm of computer-based clinical data management, as per Angelo Rossi’s 
classification, the handling of clinical data falls within the purview of semantic interoperability. 
The seamless continuation of patient care relies on the maintenance of semantic 
interoperability. Initially documented in a paper-based format and presented in a layout based 
structure, health data is stored in a repository. However, the mere storage of data is insufficient 
without a means of effective retrieval. To address this, clinical correlation becomes imperative. 
 
Table 2: Steps for HAPI FHIR Server Implementation 
Prerequisite 
Details 
Java 
Development Kit 
(JDK) 
Install the Java Development Kit (JDK) to compile Java code. 
Options include OpenJDK (http://openjdk.java.net/) and Oracle 
JDK (http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/ 
downloads/index.html). Recommended to install version 8 or newer 
for up-to-date security patches. 
Java Application 
Server (Tomcat) 
Choose a Java application server (e.g., Apache Tomcat, 
JBoss/Wildfly, Websphere). Focus on Tomcat, version 8 for this 
paper. Installation methods vary based on the operating system. 
Apache Maven 
(Java Package 
Manager) 
Download and install Apache Maven 
(https://maven.apache.org/download.cgi). Add the "bin" directory to 
the operating system’s PATH environment variable. 
Ruby and 
Bundler 
Install the Ruby programming language and Bundler (Ruby package 
manager). Installation packages may be available via the OS package 
manager or through the official Ruby website 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
238 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
(https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/). After installing Ruby, execute the 
command gem install bundler to install Bundler. 
Compiling and 
Installing HAPI 
FHIR 
Download HAPI FHIR from 
https://github.com/jamesagnew/hapi-fhir/releases. Unzip the release 
and navigate to the source code directory. Run mvn install to compile 
the source code, downloading dependencies. Deploy the generated 
.WAR file to Tomcat, either using the manager webapp or copying it 
to Tomcat’s "webapps" folder. Verify the installation by accessing 
the specified URL in a web browser. 
 
The subsequent step involves presenting health data in a manner that aligns with clinical 
findings, akin to a health-aware presentation. Various methods can be employed to search for 
data within repositories. The establishment of interoperability and interconnections among 
systems opens up multiple avenues for searching health data, whether within the same 
institution or across different institutions. Adherence to standards and guidelines facilitates 
smoother data flow, ensuring technical and process interoperability align harmoniously. 
In the context of a FHIR (Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources) server, the multiple 
pathways for data search and retrieval are enhanced, promoting efficient interoperability. This 
interconnectedness allows for a comprehensive approach to accessing health data within and 
across healthcare institutions. The utilization of FHIR standards contributes to the seamless 
flow of data, accommodating both technical and process interoperability requirements. 
Ultimately, this collaborative framework ensures the timely incorporation of updated and 
newly generated data into the system, fostering a dynamic and responsive healthcare 
information environment. 
The passage underscores the critical importance of interoperability in Sri Lanka’s future 
digital health landscape through examples of technical, semantic, and process interoperability 
failures. It emphasizes the need for a common standard to facilitate effective communication 
among healthcare professionals and institutions. The text then details the implementation FHIR 
server as a solution, involving collaboration between health and technical domains. The FHIR 
server implementation project, initiated in response to the inadequacies of existing 
identification methods, employs the ADR method in its development. The criteria for patient 
identity are discussed, including NIC, PHN, and other identifiers. The challenges of 
implementing biometrics are acknowledged due to infrastructural constraints. The passage 
outlines the importance of unique identification for various patient groups, including newborns 
and the elderly. Additionally, it highlights the consideration of status updates for deceased 
patients and suggests the analysis of duplicated records for merging. 
The development phases of the FHIR server implementation, including architecture 
design and API integration, are elaborated, with a focus on security measures. The concluding 
stages involve the finalization of the FHIR server implementation, incorporating lessons from 
the alpha and beta versions, and considering security implications. The text also briefly 
mentions the incorporation of HHIMS Synthetic Dataset testing for future use, emphasizing the 
adherence to the principles of the ADR method and the importance of continued technical 
development. The incorporation of a Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) server 
within a Primary Care Health Information System (HIS) holds paramount importance across 
various dimensions. FHIR serves as a standardized framework, facilitating the seamless 
exchange of health data within the primary care ecosystem. This standardization not only 
ensures consistency but also enables efficient communication among diverse healthcare 
applications and systems. The real-time data access capabilities of FHIR are especially crucial 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
239 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
in primary care settings, where quick access to patient information significantly influences 
decision-making and patient outcomes (Jayathissa & Hewapathirana, 2023d). 
Furthermore, FHIR promotes interoperability across different components of primary 
care HIS, ranging from electronic health records (EHRs) to laboratory and pharmacy systems. 
This interoperability fosters a comprehensive understanding of a patient’s health status, 
facilitating holistic and patient-centric care. The adaptability and scalability inherent in FHIR’s 
design contribute to its effectiveness as primary care health information systems evolve or 
expand. Its flexibility supports the integration of new functionalities, ensuring the HIS remains 
responsive to emerging healthcare requirements. 
Implementing FHIR also proves beneficial in terms of reduced development time and 
costs. The standardized approach of FHIR minimizes the complexity associated with 
developing interfaces for data exchange, making it a cost-effective solution for achieving 
interoperability in primary care HIS. Additionally, FHIR’s support for modern technologies, 
including RESTful APIs, paves the way for innovative applications and services. This 
adaptability encourages the integration of emerging technologies, creating an environment 
conducive to continuous improvement and technological advancements within the primary care 
domain. 
In summary, the integration of an FHIR server in a primary care health information 
system is instrumental in achieving seamless interoperability, supporting real-time data access, 
fostering patient-centric care, and ensuring adaptability to the evolving healthcare landscape. 
The standardization offered by FHIR not only enhances efficiency but also contributes to cost-
effective and innovative healthcare delivery within the dynamic realm of primary care. 
 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the discourse underscores the critical role of interoperability in the digital 
health landscape, emphasizing the need for a common standard to facilitate effective 
communication among healthcare professionals and institutions. The implementation of a Fast 
Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) server emerges as a pivotal solution to address 
the intricacies of technical, semantic, and process interoperability failures. This standardized 
framework not only ensures consistency but also enables efficient communication and real-
time data access within Primary Care Health Information Systems (HIS). FHIR’s adaptability 
and scalability support the evolving needs of healthcare systems, fostering interoperability and 
integration across diverse components. 
The narrative navigates through the complexities of patient data management, 
emphasizing the significance of semantic interoperability in the seamless continuation of 
patient care. The evolution from paper-based documentation to repository storage necessitates 
effective data retrieval through clinical correlation. The passage advocates for the presentation 
of health data in a manner aligned with clinical findings, introducing the concept of a health-
aware presentation. 
The integration of FHIR standards amplifies these efforts, enhancing the multiple 
pathways for data search and retrieval. This interconnectedness not only promotes efficient 
interoperability within healthcare institutions but also facilitates a comprehensive approach to 
accessing health data across different organizations. The FHIR server implementation project, 
guided by the principles of the ADR method, addresses the challenges associated with patient 
identity criteria, biometrics, and data security. The focus on unique identification, even for 
specific patient groups, reflects a commitment to inclusive and patient-centric care. 
The development phases of the FHIR server implementation, discussed in detail, 
highlight the importance of architecture design, API integration, and security measures. The 
concluding stages emphasize the incorporation of HHIMS Synthetic Dataset testing for future 
use, showcasing a forward-looking approach. Ultimately, the integration of an FHIR server in 
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
240 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
Primary Care HIS emerges as a transformative step, fostering a dynamic and responsive 
healthcare information environment that aligns harmoniously with the evolving landscape of 
digital health (Seitz, Listl, & Knaup, 2019). 
 
 
References 
Al-Sahan, A. & Saddik, B. (2016). Perceived challenges for adopting the personal health record 
(PHR) at ministry of national guard health affairs (MNGHA) - Riyadh. Online Journal 
of Public Health Informatics, 8(3), e205.  
HL7. (2014). Phr-s fm personal health record system functional model (phr-s fm). Technical 
report. 
HL7. (2017). Fast health interoperability resource. Accessed June 2018. 
Hussain, M. A., Langer, S. G., & Kohli, M. (2018). Learning HL7 FHIR using the HAPI FHIR 
server and its use in medical imaging with the SIIM dataset. Journal of Digital 
Imaging, 31(3), 334-340. 
Jayathissa, P. & Hewapathirana, R. (2022). Development of minimum clinical data set for 
master patient index (mpi) for Sri Lankan context. Dent Res Int J DRIJ, 4(4), 1–18. 
Jayathissa, P. & Hewapathirana, R. (2023a). A review of dental informatics: Current trends 
and future directions. Dental Research: An International Journal (DRIJ), 5(1), 1–4. 
Jayathissa, P. & Hewapathirana, R. (2023b). HL7/FHIR Adaptability in Primary Care Dental 
Practices in Developing Countries. European Modern Studies Journal, 7(3), 347– 351. 
Jayathissa, P. & Hewapathirana, R. (2023c). Development of a Health Information System for 
Primary Care Dental Practice. European Modern Studies Journal, 7(3), 341– 346. 
Jayathissa, P. & Hewapathirana, R. (2023d). Enhancing Interoperability among Health 
Information Systems in Low and Middle- Income Countries: a Review of Challenges and 
Strategies. International Journal of Advances in Biology (IJAB), 10(2), 1–5. 
Jayathissa, P., Dissanayake, V. H. W., & Hewapathirana, R. (2018).  Review of Master Patient 
Index. 
Dental 
Research: 
An 
International 
Journal 
(DRIJ), 
1(1), 
1–12. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.05994  
Jayathissa, P., Hewapathirana, A., Rupasinghe, R., & Piyadasa, A. (2018). Developing a Web-
based Medical Equipment Inventory System. In Proceedings of APAMI 2018 
(Vol. 18, p. 18). https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344710483_Developing_a_
Web-based_Medical_Equipment_Inventory_System  
Jayathissa, P., Sareban, M., Niebauer, J., & Hussein, R. (2023). Patient-generated health data 
interoperability through master patient index: The dh-convener approach. Stud Health 
Technol Inform, 305, 20–23. 
Jayathissa, W. G. P. T., Vajira, H.W.D., & Roshan, H. (2017a). Developing a functional 
prototype master patient index (mpi) for interoperability of e-health systems in Sri Lanka. 
Dent Res Int J DRIJ, 2(2), 9–26. 
Jayathissa, W. G. P. T., Vajira, H.W.D., & Roshan, H. (2017b). Review of Master Patient 
Index. Dent Res Int J DRIJ, 3(2), 37–48. https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.00451   
Marceglia, S., Fontelo, P., Rossi, E., & Ackerman, M. J. (2015). A standards-based architecture 
proposal for integrating patient mHealth apps to electronic health record 
systems. Applied Clinical Informatics, 6(3), 488-505. 
Ministry of Health - Sri Lanka. (2018). Essential (Health) Services Package (ESP) for Sri 
Lanka, Justification, content and implementation arrangements. Version 2.2 22/08/2018.  
Ministry of Health, Nutrition and Indigenous Medicine - Sri Lanka. (2017). Annual Health 
Bulletin 2016, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
                                                  European Modern Studies Journal                           journal-ems.com 
 
241 
European Modern Studies Journal, 2023, 7(6) 
Perera, S., Nieveras, O., de Silva, P., Wijesundara, C., & Pendse, R. (2019). Accelerating 
reforms of primary health care towards universal health coverage in Sri Lanka. WHO 
South-East Asia Journal of Public Health, 8(1), 21-25. 
Pimenta, N., Chaves, A., Sousa, R., Abelha, A., & Peixoto, H. (2023). Interoperability of 
Clinical Data through FHIR: A review. Procedia Computer Science, 220, 856-861. 
Sein, M. K., Henfridsson, O., Purao, S., Rossi, M., & Lindgren, R. (2011). Action design 
research. MIS Quarterly, 35, 37-56. 
Seitz, M.W., Listl, S., & Knaup, P. (2019). Development of an HL7 FHIR Architecture for 
Implementation of a Knowledge-sed Interdisciplinary EHR. Stud Health Technol 
Inform, 262, 256-259. 
Soares, A., Essaid, S., & Kahn, M.G. (2023). Omop-to-bulk fhir: A tool to convert population 
level clinical data into standardized FHIR batch data. Report. 
University Health Network. (2018). Hapi fhir. Accessed January 2018. 
Yuksel, M., Dogac, A., Taskin, C., & Yalcinkaya, A. (2016). A case for enterprise 
interoperability in healthcare it: personal health record systems. In E-Health and 
Telemedicine: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 1073–1096). IGI 
Global. 
