ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 220 (2023) 856–861
1877-0509 © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Conference Program Chairs
10.1016/j.procs.2023.03.115
© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Conference Program Chairs
Keywords: Interoperability; HL7; FHIR; Clinical Data
1. Introduction
The health care industry is a data-intensive one, with massive volumes of data and information created, accessed,
and transferred on a daily basis [1]. The application of digital technology capabilities in the manipulation of such
large amounts of data could improve disease prevention, promote engagement between different levels of care, support
care providers, and improve productivity and quality by enabling new ways of facilitating information flow, thereby
promoting more integrated and responsive services [2].
Despite advancements in health information technology and increased use of electronic systems, one of the major
impediments is a lack of regulation that allows healthcare providers to select their Electronic Health Record (EHR)
system based on technical, operational, economic, and legal criteria [3]. This often results in segregated patient records
in institution-centric EHRs, resulting in information fragmentation [4] with effects ranging from ineffective treatment
to a lack of crucial information during crises [1, 5]. In fact, according to a 2016 BMJ report [6], medical errors are the
third highest cause of mortality, with 44% of medical error fatalities preventable.
∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +253 510 180
E-mail address: hpeixoto@di.uminho.pt
The 4th International Workshop on Hospital 4.0 (Hospital),
March 15 - 17, 2023, Leuven, Belgium
Interoperability of Clinical Data through FHIR: A review
Nuno Pimentaa, Ant´onio Chavesa, Regina Sousaa, Ant´onio Abelhaa, Hugo Peixotoa,∗
aALGORITMI/LASI, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal
Abstract
Interoperability of clinical data remains an issue in healthcare despite technology advancements. FHIR, Fast Healthcare Inter-
operability Resources, is a standard for electronic exchange of healthcare data that is built on web standards, flexible, user-friendly
and easy to implement. This research aims to assess FHIR’s potential as a solution for interoperability by identifying critical com-
ponents of FHIR that can improve interoperability and bridge the gap between healthcare systems and sources of clinical data. By
leveraging FHIR as a standard, healthcare professionals are able to more effectively communicate and access patient information
leading to better patient care and more efficient clinical operations.
	
Nuno Pimenta  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 220 (2023) 856–861
857
Proper treatment of a patient is only possible when healthcare practitioners have access to the most up-to-date and
comprehensive collection of personal and clinical data. As a result, healthcare interoperability is critical to achieving
excellence in care, as it refers to the ability of various healthcare technology systems to meaningfully transmit infor-
mation with one another, within or across organizational boundaries [7]. Large clinical datasets may be generated by
diverging from isolated data silos, increasing the possibility of health data secondary usage for research collabora-
tions and enhancing patient care [8, 9, 10]. As a consequence, healthcare professionals’ job and patients’ quality of
life increase, as more effective treatments result in better clinical outcomes [11].
Although syntactic and semantic interoperability between different health information systems remains diffi-
cult in some cases, an emerging standard based on modern web technologies, such as Health Level 7 (HL7)
Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR), may aid in addressing interoperability concerns [12]. FHIR
takes a modular approach, with granular information represented as separate modular entities called Resources.
This basic item can be viewed as a single healthcare Lego® brick. Similar to plastic building toys, multiple
FHIR Resources are combined, for example, to form a message to be transmitted with patient data or to con-
struct an EHR [8]. These units may be utilized alone, expanded, or coupled with others to meet the vast majority
of clinical use cases, overcoming the inherent unpredictability of healthcare without steadily increasing costs and
complexity [13]. APIs, a set of well-defined interfaces to interoperate applications [14] and Representational State
Transfer (RESTful) web services generate, manage, and distribute these Resources [7].
As Vorisek et al. 2022 [15] observed, there has been a growth in the adoption of FHIR in recent years, with distinct
application objectives, including data standardization, data collecting, recruiting, analysis, and consent management.
Furthermore, it is worth noting the 5-year gap between the release of the FHIR standard and the first publication of
interest regarding it, as well as the fact that Germany and the United States had the largest number of publications. In
this regard, the authors argue that the increased occurrence is mostly attributable to previous initiatives and regulatory
measures implemented in such nations, underlining the critical importance of regulatory legislation and guidelines in
improving interoperability.
The purpose of this work is to present a not-to-exhaustive review approach to FHIR, namely by identifying some
of its points of appliance and giving illustrative examples.
2. Methods
The current research included three data sources: Scopus and Springer, which specialize in health information,
and Google Scholar, a multidisciplinary platform. The first two search engines indicated were picked with the goal
of obtaining more technical and specialist works - thus more suited to the offered work subject - and the latter was
chosen with the goal of broadening the diversity of thoughts and issues investigated.
The query phrases used were ”health FHIR interoperability communication”, ”health FHIR interoperability”,
”health FHIR security”, ”application FHIR security”, and ”security FHIR communication”. To reduce the chosen stud-
ies for the required scope, the results were largely organized by relevance, using the methodologies of the own search
engines, and the main eligibility criteria were defined: (i) open or unrestricted access, (ii) written in English, and (iii)
publication year equal to or greater than 2017. The first analysed aspects for each returning scientific paper were the
title, abstract, and keywords. When these criteria were insufficient, a thorough reading of each paper was used to
determine its inclusion.
The analysis of the flow of information throughout the various phases of publications—the identification, screening,
eligibility assessment, and inclusion processes—was partially guided by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement [16], particularly in its diagram flow for representing the selection
process of the further head analysed scientific publications. Figure 1 demonstrates the steps necessary to arrive at
the final set of included studies. 96 papers were found through database searches, including 33 from Google Scholar,
54 from Scopus, and 9 from Springer. There were no other database sources used, and the screening was performed
concurrently with the database’s returned results processing. The screening procedure included removing duplicate
entries at the source (a component that differed from the PRISMA Statement) and excluding articles whose abstracts
clearly revealed extraneous and unrelated topics. In fact, with regard to Scopus and Springer, some of the returned
results were repeated, which supports the apparent decreased preselection of studies from Springer, which was used
for searching after Scopus. Finally, 61 records were eliminated from the 96 screened articles because they did not fit
858	
Nuno Pimenta  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 220 (2023) 856–861
the inclusion criteria: no open access, outside of the set time, no explicit focus on healthcare, ontology building or
matching, or complete paid book. An additional 23 articles were rejected from the 35 full-text papers reviewed and
appraised for eligibility for the following reasons: only practical approach over FHIR, repetitive approach,
non-relevant approach, or FHIR Queries focus exclusively. As a result, 12 publications were further examined and
discussed.
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the implemented flow diagram for the studies selection.
3. Results
All of the studies offered depict advances and examples of FHIR application sectors. The selected scientific articles,
represented in Table 1, cover many aspects of FHIR’s application, such as data standards, FHIR API implementation,
data analysis, clinical trial enrollment, among others.
The lack of interoperability measures has hampered the use of clinical trial recruiting assistance systems in a
broader range of scenarios. As important clinical information and eligibility criteria are appraised in data provided in
FHIR Resources, the authors of Scherer et al. 2022 [17] set out to create a recruitment assistance system based on
FHIR. Screening for eligible patients may be done more quickly and efficiently by using FHIR Resources, a standard
data format. The clinical trial was documented in the FHIR ResearchStudy Resource components, sets of rules were
developed, and patients are evaluated for trial eligibility based on information on the patients’ FHIR Resources upon
user demand.
While the Brazilian state health system promotes OpenEHR as the main EHR information model, private providers
in Brazil have selected the HL7 FHIR standard. Given this, Gomes et al. 2019 [14] set out to create a low-cost gateway
for EHR interoperability that makes use of both standards, allowing semantic interoperability across disparate systems.
The goal is to create a platform that acts as an integration hub and a data server, through which all communication
goes, allowing communication between systems that adhere to different standards. The platform contains an API
gateway that acts as an endpoint for data exchange across various networks, as well as an FHIR Broker that is in
charge of mapping and processing data from proprietary structures into the FHIR standard.
Hong et al. 2018 [18] introduced the MedicationStatement FHIR Resource, a framework for modulating structured
and unstructured data from a clinic’s EMR into a consistent and compatible format. Natural Language Processing
	
Nuno Pimenta  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 220 (2023) 856–861
859
Table 1. Selected FHIR-related studies.
Authors
Title
Year
FHIR Application
Scherer et al. [17]
Implementation of a Clinical Trial
Recruitment Support System Based
on Fast Healthcare Interoperability
Resources (FHIR) in a Cardiology Department
2022
Clinical trial recruitment support system
definition, as both clinical trial eligibility
criteria and patient health data
are defined in FHIR Resources
Gomes et al. [14]
GIRLS, a Gateway for Interoperability of electronic
health Record in Low-cost System: Interoperability
between FHIR and OpenEHR Standards
2019
FHIR Resources used for structuring
data and allowing
Brazilian-nationwide services communication
Hong et al. [18]
Integrating Structured and Unstructured
EHR Data Using an FHIR-based Type
System: A Case Study with Medication Data
2018
MedicationStatement FHIR Resource as
standard data model and HAPI FHIR used for
serialization of NLP output into JSON or XML
Gruendner et al. [19]
KETOS: Clinical decision support and
machine learning as a service – A training
and deployment platform based on
Docker, OMOP-CDM, and FHIR Web Services
2019
FHIR applied for standardizing
heterogenous hospital data prior to statistical
analysis and creation of decision support systems
Hidayat et al. [20]
A Preliminary Implementation of HL7 FHIR
to Achieve Interoperability in Indonesia’s Local EHR
2020
FHIR Resources used to standardly
represent data comprehended in Indonesian EHRs
Zampognaro et al. [21]
Definition of an FHIR-based multiprotocol
IoT home gateway to support the dynamic plug of
new devices within instrumented environments
2021
FHIR Adapter established to convert
certain types of devices data into Resources
Semenov et al. [22]
Experience in Developing an FHIR Medical
Data Management Platform to
Provide Clinical Decision Support
2019
FHIR format as the accepted entering format
for the clinical decision support system
Lee et al. [23]
Implement an International Interoperable
PHR by FHIR—A Taiwan Innovative Application
2020
FHIR Resources as a standard data model
and HAPI FHIR used for format validation
Storck et al. [12]
Interoperability improvement of Mobile Patient
Survey (MoPat) implementing fast
health interoperability resources (FHIR)
2019
FHIR Questionnaire Resource used for
standard metadata import and clinical data export
Kiourtis et al. [24]
Health information exchange through a Device
-to-Device protocol supporting lossless
encoding and decoding
2022
A diverse number of FHIR Resources structure
data exchange in offline data transaction through
a device-to-device messaging protocol
Xu et al. [25]
FHIR PIT: an open software application for
spatiotemporal integration of clinical
data and environmental exposures data
2020
FHIR Resources represent data used for
environmental exposures analysis and study
of its effect on health
Scheible et al. [26]
AHD2FHIR: A Tool for Mapping of Natural Lang-
uage Annotations to Fast Healthcare
Interoperability Resources – A Technical Case Report
2022
Presenting NLP-resulting text analysis in
FHIR format
(NLP) technologies were utilized to identify clinical aspects as two distinct modeling workflows: one for unstructured
data and another for merging the output of the first workflow with structured data, resulting in the creation of a
full FHIR Resource. A rule-based method implemented in HAPI FHIR, a java-based open-source implementation
of the HL7 FHIR standard [27], was outlined for allocating NLP output types to the relevant and desirable FHIR
components in the clinical NLP pipeline. Although it received favorable outcomes, the authors mention the fact that
FHIR’s standardization effort is ongoing as a continuing quest.
Furthermore, Gruendner et al. 2019 [19] saw a lack of a platform that would allow researchers to undertake
statistical studies and deploy the derived models in a safe hospital setting. As a result, they created a system
860	
Nuno Pimenta  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 220 (2023) 856–861
for doing data analysis, training, and deploying decision support models in a hospital or healthcare context using
standardized input data. Given that high quality standardized data is essential to implement accurate models, the
developed FHIR Server works as a critical pre-processing service prior to analysis by turning hospital data -
generally heterogeneous - into FHIR Resources. After building models with thisstructured data, they are installed
within a hospital’s IT infrastructure and may be invoked by a professional-facing app. It should be highlighted that
one of the linked restrictions is the previously described FHIR Resource preparation, which is regarded the primary
bottleneck for performance, since several rest calls and merging of the JSON FHIR Resources required the most time.
Hidayat et al. 2020 [20] intended to enforce an EHR client-server prototype to simulate health data transfer in
Indonesian EHRs systems, utilizing FHIR Resources and REST API, mapping EHR components to FHIR Resources
elements, and resorting to profiling to further meet the requirements of Indonesian health centers; Zampognaro et al.
2021 [21] characterized a smartphone-based Internet of Things (IoT) Home Gateway design that allows devices, such
as sensing devices and smartphones, to continue to stick to their own protocol, while also establishing interoperability
and heterogeneous communication, because their native format is always converted to FHIR Resource by an FHIR
Adapter; Semenov et al. 2019 [22] predefined FHIR format as the input structure for their clinical decision-making
system and uses this format to collect information into the stated internal Rule Engine; Lee et al. 2020 [23] developed
an interoperable FHIR-based Personal Health Record (PHR) translation method that transforms and saves medical
data as FHIR Resources, with conversion validation performed by HAPI FHIR Server; in Storck et al. 2019 [12], an
electronic patient reported outcome system Mobile Patient Survey (MoPat) was tailored to sustain metadata import and
clinical data transfer using FHIR, where MoPat questionnaire data model fields were mapped to FHIR Questionnaire
Resource elements, resulting in a wider variety of options and types in the FHIR format; Kiourtis et al. 2022 [24]
investigated an alternative to the multiple methods for transferring data without internet connection, offering a device-
to-device offline short-range distances protocol and leveraging HL7 FHIR Resources to format healthcare data; Xu et
al. 2020 [25] observed a lack of attention concerning environmental exposures data and its influential role in health
and diseases, so the researchers designed an application to facilitate studies of the health impact of these exposures,
and FHIR Resources performed the function of representing data (particularly geocodes, which are important for the
needed spatiotemporal data analysis); and finally, Scheible et al. 2022 [26] introduced a server-based software capable
of accepting clinical text, transmitting it to a German-language medical NLP engine, and returning the text analysis
results to the client as FHIR Resources.
4. Conclusions
Naturally, national and international terminologies and standards are required by software systems when managing
scientific data between health-related institutions. Throughout this review, it is possible to notice that FHIR has a wide
range of application areas, and it is believed that other areas must exist besides those mentioned in this review.
From assisting in the recruitment of people for clinical trials to presenting itself as a format of choice in the
standardization of data stored and communicated in processes inherent to health care, collaboration on large-
scale data research is facilitated, and integration at the local, regional, national, and international levels is more
readily resolved. Furthermore, systems, communication, and frameworks become easier, since the translation and
correspondence between distinct data representations are no longer required. Furthermore, with connected medical
devices and enhanced electronic health information exchange, healthcare practitioners may manage clinical evidence,
communicate, and evaluate it, eventually improving patient information coordination and care processes.
Essentially, interoperability has become a must, rather than a choice in healthcare. Reusing health-related
data allows for a broader picture of real-world patient populations, better understanding illness demographic and
socioeconomic patterns, enrolling patients for clinical trials, analyzing therapeutic efficacy, and long-term
monitoring, among other things. As previously said, FHIR has its applicability in all of these domains, particularly in
terms of interoperability characteristics, and that provides a remarkable value to the standard.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by FCT—Fundac¸˜ao para a Ciˆencia e Tecnologia within the R&D Units Project
Scope: UIDB/00319/2020.
	
Nuno Pimenta  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 220 (2023) 856–861
861
References
[1] R. H. Hylock, X. Zeng, A blockchain framework for patient-centered health records and exchange (healthchain): Evaluation and proof-of-
concept study, J Med Internet Res 21 (8) (2019).
[2] M. Rosa, C. Faria, A. M. Barbosa, A. I. Martins, A. F. Almeida, N. P. Rocha, A platform of services to support community-dwelling older
adults integrating fhir and complex security mechanisms, Procedia Computer Science 160 (2019) 314–321.
[3] S. K. Mukhiya, Y. Lamo, An hl7 fhir and graphql approach for interoperability between heterogeneous electronic health record systems, Health
Informatics Journal 27 (3) (2021).
[4] J. Machado, A. Abelha, J. Neves, M. Santos, Ambient intelligence in medicine, in: 2006 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference,
2006, pp. 94–97.
[5] S. N. Kasthurirathne, B. Mamlin, H. Kumara, G. Grieve, P. Biondich, Enabling better interoperability for HealthCare: Lessons in developing a
standards based application programing interface for electronic medical record systems, Journal of Medical Systems 39 (11) (2015).
[6] M. A. Makary, M. Daniel, Medical error—the third leading cause of death in the us, BMJ 353 (2016).
[7] R. Saripalle, C. Runyan, M. Russell, Using hl7 fhir to achieve interoperability in patient health record, Journal of Biomedical Informatics 94
(2019).
[8] R. K. Saripalle, Leveraging FHIR to integrate activity data with electronic health record, Health and Technology 10 (1) (2019) 341–352.
[9] M. Rosa, C. Faria, A. M. Barbosa, H. Caravau, A. F. Rosa, N. P. Rocha, A fast healthcare interoperability resources (fhir) implementation
integrating complex security mechanisms, Procedia Computer Science 164 (2019) 524–531, cENTERIS 2019 - International Conference
on ENTERprise Information Systems / ProjMAN 2019 - International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist 2019 - International
Conference on Health and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies, CENTERIS/ProjMAN/HCist 2019.
[10] Y. Petrakis, A. Kouroubali, D. Katehakis, A mobile app architecture for accessing emrs using xds and fhir, in: 2019 IEEE 19th International
Conference on Bioinformatics and Bioengineering (BIBE), 2019, pp. 278–283.
[11] N. Pimenta, R. Sousa, H. Peixoto, J. Machado, A comprehensive study on personal and medical information to predict diabetes, in: S. Omatu,
R. Mehmood, P. Sitek, S. Cicerone, S. Rodr´ıguez (Eds.), Distributed Computing and Artificial Intelligence, 19th International Conference,
Springer International Publishing, 2023, pp. 197–207.
[12] M. Storck, L. Hollenberg, M. Dugas, I. Soto-Rey, Interoperability improvement of mobile patient survey (mopat) implementing fast health
interoperability resources (fhir), Studies in Health Technology and Informatics 258 (2019) 141 – 145.
[13] Y. Aliakbarpoor, S. Comai, G. Pozzi, Designing a hl7 compatible personal health record for mobile devices, in: 2017 IEEE 3rd International
Forum on Research and Technologies for Society and Industry (RTSI), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[14] F. Gomes, R. Freitas, M. Ribeiro, C. Moura, O. Andrade, M. Oliveira, GIRLS, a gateway for interoperability of electronic health record in
low-cost system : Interoperability beetween FHIR and OpenEHR standards, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on E-health Networking,
Application &amp Services (HealthCom), IEEE, 2019.
[15] C. N. Vorisek, M. Lehne, S. A. I. Klopfenstein, P. J. Mayer, A. Bartschke, T. Haese, S. Thun, Fast healthcare interoperability resources (fhir)
for interoperability in health research: Systematic review, JMIR Medical Informatics 10 (7) (2022).
[16] Prisma statement, https://www.prisma-statement.org/PRISMAStatement/PRISMAStatement, accessed: 11-01-2023.
[17] C. Scherer, S. Endres, M. Orban, S. K¨a¨ab, S. Massberg, A. Winter, M. L¨obe, Implementation of a clinical trial recruitment support system
based on fast healthcare interoperability resources (FHIR) in a cardiology department, in: Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, IOS
Press, 2022.
[18] N. Hong, A. Wen, F. Shen, S. Sohn, S. Liu, H. Liu, G. Jiang, Integrating structured and unstructured ehr data using an fhir-based type system: A
case study with medication data, AMIA Joint Summits on Translational Science proceedings. AMIA Joint Summits on Translational Science
2017 (2018) 74–83.
[19] J. Gruendner, T. Schwachhofer, P. Sippl, N. Wolf, M. Erpenbeck, C. Gulden, L. A. Kapsner, J. Zierk, S. Mate, M. St¨urzl, R. Croner, H. .
Prokosch, D. Toddenroth, Ketos: Clinical decision support and machine learning as a service – a training and deployment platform based on
docker, omop-cdm, and fhir web services, PLoS ONE 14 (10) (2019).
[20] I. F. Hidayat, B. R. Hermanto, A preliminary implementation of hl7 fhir to achieve interoperability in indonesia’s local ehr, in: 2020 27th
International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT), 2020, pp. 1–5.
[21] P. Zampognaro, G. Paragliola, V. Falanga, Definition of an FHIR-based multiprotocol IoT home gateway to support the dynamic plug of new
devices within instrumented environments, Journal of Reliable Intelligent Environments 8 (4) (2021) 319–331.
[22] I. Semenov, R. Osenev, S. Gerasimov, G. Kopanitsa, D. Denisov, Y. Andreychuk, Experience in developing an fhir medical data management
platform to provide clinical decision support, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17 (1) (2020).
[23] Y.-L. Lee, H.-A. Lee, C.-Y. Hsu, H.-H. Kung, H.-W. Chiu, Implement an international interoperable phr by fhir—a taiwan innovative applica-
tion, Sustainability (Switzerland) 13 (1) (2021) 1 – 17.
[24] A. Kiourtis, A. Mavrogiorgou, D. Kyriazis, Health information exchange through a device-to-device protocol supporting lossless encoding and
decoding, Journal of Biomedical Informatics 134 (2022).
[25] H. Xu, S. Cox, L. Stillwell, E. Pfaff, J. Champion, S. C. Ahalt, K. Fecho, FHIR PIT: an open software application for spatiotemporal integration
of clinical data and environmental exposures data, BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 20 (1) (2020).
[26] R. Scheible, D. Caliskan, P. Fischer, F. Thomczyk, S. Zabka, H. Schneider, M. Boeker, S. Schulz, H.-U. Prokosch, C. Gulden, AHD2fhir: A
tool for mapping of natural language annotations to fast healthcare interoperability resources – a technical case report, in: MEDINFO 2021:
One World, One Health – Global Partnership for Digital Innovation, IOS Press, 2022.
[27] A. Chatterjee, A. Prinz, Representation of personal and person-generated data with HL7 FHIR and HAPI endpoint security with TSD: Proof-
of-concept study (2021).
