www.thelancet.com/digital-health   Vol 5   November 2023	
e840
Viewpoint
Lancet Digit Health 2023; 
5: e840–47
Published Online
September 21, 2023
https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2589-7500(23)00156-5
Machine Learning and Data 
Analytics Lab, Department of 
Artificial Intelligence in 
Biomedical Engineering, 
Friedrich-Alexander-
Universität Erlangen-
Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany 
(R Raab MSc, A Küderle MSc, 
A Zakreuskaya, MSc, 
Prof B M Eskofier PhD); Harvard 
Business School and Harvard-
MIT Center for Regulatory 
Science, Boston, MA, USA 
(A D Stern PhD); Chair of Digital 
Medicine, Luxembourg Centre 
for Systems Biomedicine, 
University of Luxembourg, 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg 
(Prof J Klucken MD); Digital 
Medicine Group, Luxembourg 
Institute of Health, Strassen, 
Luxembourg (Prof J Klucken); 
Centre Hospitalier de 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 
Luxembourg (Prof J Klucken); 
Klinikum Rechts der Isar, 
Technical University of Munich, 
Institute for Artificial 
Intelligence and Informatics in 
Medicine, Munich, Germany 
(G Kaissis MD MHBA, 
Prof D Rueckert PhD); Helmholtz 
Munich, Institute for Machine 
Learning in Biomedical 
Imaging, Neuherberg, 
Germany (G Kaissis); 
Department of Computing, 
Imperial College London, 
London, UK (Prof D Rueckert, 
G Kaissis); OFFIS—Institut für 
Informatik, Oldenburg, 
Germany (Prof S Boll Dr techn); 
Berlin Institute of Health at 
Charité – Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Digital Health Center, 
Berlin, Germany (Prof R Eils PhD, 
H Wagener Dipl-Inf) 
Correspondence to:
Prof Bjoern M Eskofier, Machine 
Learning and Data Analytics Lab, 
Department of Artificial 
Intelligence in Biomedical 
Engineering, Friedrich-Alexander-
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
91052 Erlangen, Germany
bjoern.eskofier@fau.de
Federated electronic health records for the European Health 
Data Space 
René Raab, Arne Küderle, Anastasiya Zakreuskaya, Ariel D Stern, Jochen Klucken, Georgios Kaissis, Daniel Rueckert, Susanne Boll, Roland Eils, 
Harald Wagener, Bjoern M Eskofier 
The European Commission’s draft for the European Health Data Space (EHDS) aims to empower citizens to access 
their personal health data and share it with physicians and other health-care providers. It further defines procedures 
for the secondary use of electronic health data for research and development. Although this planned legislation is 
undoubtedly a step in the right direction, implementation approaches could potentially result in centralised data silos 
that pose data privacy and security risks for individuals. To address this concern, we propose federated personal 
health data spaces, a novel architecture for storing, managing, and sharing personal electronic health records that 
puts citizens at the centre—both conceptually and technologically. The proposed architecture puts citizens in control 
by storing personal health data on a combination of personal devices rather than in centralised data silos. We describe 
how this federated architecture fits within the EHDS and can enable the same features as centralised systems while 
protecting the privacy of citizens. We further argue that increased privacy and control do not contradict the use of 
electronic health data for research and development. Instead, data sovereignty and transparency encourage active 
participation in studies and data sharing. This combination of privacy-by-design and transparent, privacy-preserving 
data sharing can enable health-care leaders to break the privacy-exploitation barrier, which currently limits the 
secondary use of health data in many cases.
Introduction
The application of artificial intelligence (AI) to medicine 
has resulted in substantial improvements in many fields; 
for example, in the diagnosis of cancer1 and drug 
discovery.2 However, AI systems driven by training data 
require large quantities of curated and annotated medical 
data.
Compiling adequate research databases outside of 
dedicated studies requires standardised and unified digital 
medical data storage on a national or even international 
scale and legal frameworks regulating and governing data 
access. Efforts to establish national research databases in 
several countries have been ongoing for decades (eg, 
Clinical Practice Research Datalink and Optimum Patient 
Care Research Database in the UK,3,4 Medizininformatik-
Initiative 
in 
Germany,5 
Sundhedsdatastyrelsen 
in 
Denmark,6 and Estonian National Health Information 
System in Estonia7). The COVID-19 pandemic further 
fuelled the development and implementation of digital 
health solutions overall and specifically for tracking the 
COVID-19 pandemic and vaccine effectiveness using 
health data (eg, EAVE II in Scotland,8 OpenSAFELY in the 
UK,9 and Netzwerk Universitätsmedizin COVID-19 Data 
Exchange Platform and Netzwerk Universitätsmedizin-
Routinedatenplattform in Germany10,11). Despite these 
efforts, broad access to medical records for research and 
development is not yet commonplace.
The lack of unified data systems not only slows 
advances in medical research but also negatively affects 
the health journeys of individuals. Incomplete medical 
records and difficulties accessing a patient’s medical 
history compromise the overall quality of care that 
clinicians can provide. Furthermore, the effort required 
to compile, manage, and update personal medical 
information creates a barrier to engaging with one’s 
health and limits the right of citizens to control their 
sensitive health data.
Several countries and health-care organisations are 
working on approaches for enabling individuals to access 
and manage their health data, but the implementation 
and maturity of such initiatives vary. In the USA, many 
health-care provider organisations offer access to patient 
portals with diverse features, but such systems are often 
not interoperable. For this reason, for-profit, third-party 
services collect and merge patients’ health data on their 
behalf.12 In Europe, health-care digitalisation efforts are 
coordinated on a national level but also differ substantially 
in their implementation. Approaches range from singular 
national databases as seen in Estonia,7 to systems with 
multiple centralised organisations that store copies of the 
original data, as in Germany,13 to decentralised systems, 
such as Elektronische Gesundheitsakte in Austria,14 
where data is stored by the health-care provider who first 
collected or generated the data. Although citizens can 
legally access their data in these countries, lingering 
issues regarding usability and real or perceived privacy 
concerns still prevent widespread adoption.15,16
Misunderstandings around privacy rights often hinder 
large-scale use or exploitation of health data outside of 
the immediate health-care delivery setting. The perceived 
conflict between the rights of citizens and the rights of 
potential data users aiming to improve research and care 
delivery for the common good creates a privacy-
exploitation barrier that needs to be overcome to enable 
the best of both worlds.
To provide a general solution for overcoming this 
barrier within the heterogeneous digital health landscape 
in Europe, the European Commission recently proposed 
a draft for the European Health Data Space (EHDS) 
regulation.17,18 This regulation aims to make electronic 
e841	
www.thelancet.com/digital-health   Vol 5   November 2023
Viewpoint
health data widely available to EU citizens and their 
physicians. 
Furthermore, 
it 
outlines 
regulatory 
procedures for requesting access to anonymised health 
data for research, development, and regulatory purposes 
(figure 1). 
Although this regulation might in principle overcome 
the privacy-exploitation barrier, we argue that a 
sustainable approach for building EHDS-compliant 
infrastructure still needs to be developed and resolved. 
Hasty and heterogeneous implementations at the 
member-state level will risk fragmenting the European 
data landscape and might lead to rejection by citizens 
and researchers alike.
Therefore, we argue that a common European system 
should not only enable interoperability across existing 
eHealth frameworks. Instead, it presents an opportunity 
to rethink national efforts to create a truly flexible and 
unified system that primarily focuses on meeting the 
needs of citizens and, furthermore, enables the use of 
health data for industry and research for decades to 
come. Therefore, we propose federated personal health 
data spaces, a truly citizen-centred solution for personal 
health data management in which citizens can set up 
and operate their personal health data spaces on digital 
devices controlled by them (figure 2), acting together as a 
federation to provide redundancy 
and 
technical 
resilience. Such a system would give citizens full control 
over their data and ensure that data concerning health 
stay with them wherever they go within Europe or 
beyond. By following a privacy-by-design approach, our 
proposed concept also aligns with the European General 
Data Protection Regulation (article 25: data protection by 
design and by default).19
We envision the proposed system as going well beyond 
the traditional doctor–patient relationship. Hence, we 
term this approach citizen-centred rather than patient-
centred, because it encompasses the full spectrum of 
tools, ranging from digital wellness applications to 
wearables, fitness trackers, and preventive health care, 
and includes the acute treatment of citizens as patients.
With personal health data spaces, we propose a concept 
that would not only fulfil the requirements of the EHDS 
but go beyond them: personal health data spaces would 
give citizens full control over sharing their data with 
physicians, researchers, and others. Empowering citizens 
to shape their personal health data spaces according to 
their needs and preferences could help to enable more 
transparency, trust, and acceptance than existing national 
solutions. Science benefits as the willingness of citizens 
to participate in research increases through transparency 
and trust; as a result, previously infeasible large-scale 
study designs can emerge. We also provide a concept for 
using privacy-preserving federated algorithms that allow 
third parties to exploit medical data while protecting 
individual privacy. A more technical description of the 
concept and its connection to the proposed EHDS is 
provided in the appendix (pp 1–3).
EHDS regulation
To implement compatible European eHealth systems, 
interoperability requirements are necessary to enable 
cross-border data exchange between health-care infor­
mation technology systems and health-care professionals. 
The EHDS proposal17 from May 3, 2022—which might 
still 
undergo 
minor 
changes—lays 
down 
these 
requirements for the EU in the context of two main use 
cases of electronic health data: primary use and secondary 
use (figure 1).
Primary use denotes the processing of electronic health 
data to support health care and related services. The 
introduction of national electronic health data access 
services enables citizens to view, manage, and share their 
electronic health data with health-care professionals who 
can access shared data through a separate national health 
professional access service. The EHDS proposal does not 
provide any specifications as to where the electronic 
health data should be stored. Instead, the two access 
services are intended to act as gateways. Citizens can 
enrich their electronic health record by adding real-world 
data from wellness apps and wearables, such as fitness 
trackers or smartwatches, as well as patient-reported 
outcomes collected while managing chronic diseases or 
after acute events or procedures. The proposal further 
requires data access to be logged, the ability to set up 
proxy access (for those who do not want to or cannot 
manage their health data independently), and enabling 
access by health-care professionals in emergencies.
Whereas primary use directly supports routine health 
care and health management, the EHDS defines 
secondary use as processing electronic health data for 
regulation and governance, education and scientific 
research, product and service development, algorithm 
Figure 1: Primary and secondary use of electronic health data as proposed by the EHDS
The EHDS envisions that citizens can access, manage, and share their electronic health data in a standardised 
format. Primary use entails the sharing and processing of electronic health data with health-care professionals and 
related services for health care. Secondary use entails the sharing and processing of electronic health data for 
research, development, and regulatory purposes. Figure adapted from The European Commission Directorate-
General for Health and Food Safety.18 EHDS=European Health Data Space.
Primary use
Secondary use
Use of health data for research,
innovation, and policy making
(after obtaining a permit)
Health-care professionals
produce and access data
using their medical systems
Standardised and
consolidated health
data of the individual
Individuals can access
their data online and can
ask others to help them
See Online for appendix
www.thelancet.com/digital-health   Vol 5   November 2023	
e842
Viewpoint
and AI development, and personalised health care. The 
EHDS explicitly forbids data processing for purposes 
that are harmful to citizens and for advertising or 
marketing. This restriction is enforced by providing 
access to non-identifiable health data for secondary use 
almost exclusively via national health data access bodies 
that review data access applications (appendix p 3). If a 
health data access body grants access, it collects relevant 
electronic health data from data holders (eg, health-care 
professionals, hospitals, or insurers) and provides a de-
identified dataset to the applicant (the so-called data user) 
in a secure processing environment. The involvement of 
citizens in this process is not defined in detail and largely 
depends on legislation of member states, especially 
regarding important topics such as consent and citizen 
involvement.
Crucially, the EHDS does not provide technical 
implementation details. Without further clarification, the 
broad definitions and lack of clear guidance in the EHDS 
proposal will probably lead to the persistence of diverse 
national solutions (figure 3 shows how existing systems 
could be adapted in the context of the EHDS). This 
amplifies the risk that current issues and the opaque 
inner workings of some of these systems will persist, and 
the technical complexity of the existing national solutions 
will increase further. The EHDS proposal has the 
potential to fundamentally alter how citizens, health-care 
professionals, and data users interact with medical data. 
However, without a large-scale system overhaul, the 
wider aim of creating a seamless digital care process and 
advancing the next generation of data-driven medical 
research and development in Europe will not be met.
Federated personal health data spaces
The ongoing transition to patient-centred health care 
already helps to empower patients to participate actively 
in their health-care journey, leading to higher patient 
satisfaction and measurable improvements in health 
outcomes.20,21 However, for health care to be truly citizen-
centred, it is essential to also apply this approach of 
personal control and engagement to medical data 
manage­ment. Therefore, the primary goal of a 
reimagined health data management system should be 
to place the citizen at the centre of the emerging 
system—both conceptually and technologically. However, 
to uncritically hail this as the solution to all problems 
with data sharing and privacy would mean succumbing 
to technological solutionism,22 compromising the rights 
of those who should be protected. Nevertheless, there is a 
need to identify and develop citizen-controlled solutions 
for those who are fundamentally dependent on better 
access to health data.
To support this citizen-centred health-care process, 
medical data solutions should provide citizens with full 
access to and control over their medical records, allowing 
for even deeper engagement with their health. Further­
more, we think that fundamental rights, such as access 
to one’s own personal information, should, to the extent 
possible, be guaranteed through the core design of a data 
management system and not merely through legal 
provisions.23
A personal health data space would incorporate the 
fundamental rights of citizens into its design by storing 
data on personal devices, such as smartphones, laptops, 
or computers, and synchronising data between them. 
Running the same synchronisation software on all 
devices and continuously keeping the data on each device 
up to date would allow the federation of devices to act as 
a unit that interacts with health-care professionals’ 
computer systems and the national health data access 
body to enable primary and secondary use. Here, we 
outline the architecture and ideas underlying the 
personal health data space concept (figure 2). Further 
details on the implementation and integration into the 
EHDS are shown in the appendix (pp 1–3).
By giving citizens complete physical control over every 
aspect of their health data, a personal health data space 
would become private and safe, encouraging citizens to 
use it for storing and understanding their personal 
health and wellness data. Furthermore, we envision the 
personal health data space as a personal computing 
environment, allowing users to analyse private data on 
their own devices using certified algorithms to gain 
additional insights into their health journey without 
sharing data with a third party. This could enable novel 
AI-based telehealth approaches while eliminating some 
associated privacy concerns.
Patient access to electronic health records has been 
found to have positive effects, such as reassurance, 
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed federated personal health data space
The concept of the personal health data space builds on a foundation of storing medical data on personal devices 
and constantly synchronising data across these devices. This approach is supported by encrypted backups to 
protect against data loss. In such a setup, physicians can look up a citizen’s details through the national health 
professional access service and request data for primary use directly from each citizen’s personal health data space. 
The national health data access body publishes secondary use requests, which are downloaded regularly by each 
personal health data space. If a citizen or their data match a request, the personal health data space software 
displays the request to the citizen; if they agree with the data sharing request, the personal health data space 
transmits the requested data to the health data access body (appendix pp 3–4).
Citizen
Friends and
family
Replica provider
Encrypted backup
Regulators
Industry
Research
Physician
Physician
Federated personal health data space
Health
professional
access service
Health data
access body
e843	
www.thelancet.com/digital-health   Vol 5   November 2023
Viewpoint
reduced anxiety, increased awareness of their overall 
health, and improved patient outcomes.24 However, 
patients are concerned about the security, privacy, and 
confidentiality of their health data.24 Personal health data 
spaces would require users to interact more actively with 
these topics, whereas existing systems place this 
obligation 
on 
system 
providers. 
Although 
the 
involvement of users would provide the chance for 
increased privacy and security, it could easily place an 
overwhelming burden on them. Against the backdrop of 
these concerns, a personal health data space could 
flexibly adapt to the requirements, perceived trust, and 
technical abilities of the users. Some citizens might 
decide to store data only on devices they physically own 
and control, to selectively share data only with doctors 
they trust, and to participate only in research they 
understand and believe to be worthwhile. Other citizens 
could decide to hand over control to a data fiduciary that 
is then in charge of managing their data, automatically 
accepting any data-sharing request from their physicians, 
and participating in any research study approved by the 
health data access body. In the latter case, personal 
devices would only be required as viewing devices for 
individual’s data, similar to existing systems. This 
flexibility would allow the personal health data space to 
cater to the needs and requirements of more diverse 
groups of people than singular centralised solutions. It 
would also ensure that the personal health data space 
could act interchangeably with traditional solutions 
within the context of the EHDS proposal (appendix 
pp 1–2). Panel 1 provides an example of primary use 
interactions with personal health data spaces. 
As well as empowering citizens and enabling primary 
use, personal health data spaces could also provide 
Figure 3: Overview of possible implementation approaches within the EHDS framework
Diagram of how existing eHealth frameworks could be implemented within the proposed EHDS. The EHDS foresees that individuals can access their personal health data through one or more health 
data access services. Health-care professionals access their patients’ medical records through a central health professional access service. Data access for secondary use (research, development, and 
regulatory purposes) occurs through the national health data access body. (A) In a centralised national electronic health record system (as in Estonia), there is only one central storage system for all 
medical data, which can be accessed via the health data access service, health professional access service, and health data access body. (B) Patients access their data via a corresponding access service in 
a setting with multiple centralised electronic health record systems (as in Germany). Here, the health professional access service and health data access body provide access to all electronic health 
record systems. (C) In a system with multiple decentralised electronic health record systems (as in Austria), data are stored by health-care professionals who can connect to each other through the 
health professional access service. By contrast, the health data access service and health data access body provide access to all data pools. (D) In the proposed federated personal health data spaces, 
data are stored on individuals’ devices, rendering the health data access service obsolete. Health-care professionals can look up the personal health data spaces of their patients through the health 
professional access service and directly connect to the relevant data space. The health data access body publishes lists of data requests to which personal health data spaces can react and share the 
requested data with the health data access body (if approved by the data space user). EHDS=European Health Data Space.
Citizen
Friends and
family
Replica
provider
Federated personal health data space
Health data access service
Health professional access service
Health data access body
A National centralised electronic health record system
B Multiple centralised electronic health record systems
C Decentralised electronic health record systems
D Federated personal health data spaces
www.thelancet.com/digital-health   Vol 5   November 2023	
e844
Viewpoint
immense benefit for secondary use by allowing citizens 
to actively decide about data sharing for research and 
development purposes (panel 2). Although this might 
seem counterintuitive, studies have shown that people 
are more willing to share data if they receive information 
about the requesting party and can exercise control over 
the shared data categories.25,26 Furthermore, the ability for 
researchers to interact with citizens would open up the 
possibility for large-scale population studies, which are 
infeasible with existing dominant recruiting methods. 
Beyond asking for consent, researchers could ask people 
to complete questionnaires, screen for active study 
participation, inform them about study outcomes, or ask 
them to enter or record data not yet available within their 
personal health data space (appendix p 2). 
The personal health data space framework enables 
privacy-preserving methods for the secondary use of 
health data by providing local computational capabilities 
in addition to mere data storage. Tools such as differential 
privacy and federated learning do not require the sharing 
of identifiable personal health data with anyone—not 
even the health data access body (appendix pp 2–3)—but 
still enable the secondary use of health data. Differential 
privacy distorts data before sharing to minimise the risk 
of re-identification of citizens but has a minimal effect 
on the statistical analysis by the data users. Federated 
learning enables the distributed training of machine 
learning models on citizens’ devices to support scientific 
discovery and the personalisation of AI models to 
individual requirements (panel 3).
In summary, the personal health data space framework 
empowers citizens by providing flexibility in handling 
their personal health data in three areas. First, the 
approach provides flexibility on a personal level regarding 
the structure of the individual personal health data space 
infrastructure. Here, the spectrum ranges from a self-
hosted ecosystem managed exclusively by the citizen to 
an ecosystem hosted and managed by a data fiduciary. 
Second, the framework provides additional flexibility for 
decision making regarding data sharing for secondary 
use. Citizens can choose how to share information, 
whom to share information with, and how to make 
decisions about requests to share information. This 
flexibility ranges from an opt-out of all data sharing to a 
general opt-in to data sharing for any legitimate request. 
Intermediate 
options 
include 
making 
individual 
decisions about each request or agreeing in advance to 
share for specific purposes or with specific entities. 
Third, the framework provides flexibility regarding the 
data-sharing mechanism. Personal health data can be 
shared either directly without any modifications (for the 
health data access body to anonymise) or through 
privacy-preserving techniques such as differential privacy 
or federated learning, which do not share any identifying 
information.
This range of possibilities for citizens and data users 
provides the necessary tools for creating a transparent 
Panel 1: Primary use process (eg, citizen–clinician 
interactions and data sharing)
In this hypothetical example of primary use interactions with 
personal health data spaces, Alex has recently moved and 
visits their new doctor, Robin, for a routine check-up. Before 
coming to the practice for the first time, Alex scheduled an 
appointment online and provided some form of digital 
identity. After receiving the appointment request, Robin’s 
practice management system approves the appointment and 
recognises that Alex is a new patient and has not shared their 
medical data yet. The software system uses Alex’s identity to 
request Alex’s personal health data space connection details 
from a national registry and sends a data access request to 
Alex’s personal health data space. Shortly after setting up the 
appointment, Alex receives a notification in the personal 
health data space application on their mobile phone, 
containing the data sharing request from Robin’s practice 
management system. Alex can now decide what information 
to share with Robin. After approving the request, Robin’s 
practice management system and Alex’s personal health data 
space establish a bidirectional sharing connection until a time 
at which Alex revokes Robin’s permissions (eg, after moving 
to a new doctor). Unless Alex chooses otherwise, all future 
data in Alex’s personal health data space will be shared with 
Robin and all relevant data on Robin’s side (eg, results of 
medical tests, diagnoses, and laboratory results) will be 
shared with Alex.
Panel 2: Secondary use process (eg, data sharing between citizen, health data access 
body, and  researcher)
In this hypothetical example of secondary use interactions with personal health data 
spaces, Charlie is a researcher and wants to learn more about the connection between 
hypertension and specific medications. They send a data request to their national health 
data access body (according to the legal requirements of the European Health Data Space) 
specifying the required types of data and study inclusion criteria. The health data access 
body reviews the request and, after approval, publishes it in its register of open requests.
Luca has a personal health data space and is generally willing to share their data for 
research. However, they want to decide about data sharing on a case-by-case basis. Their 
personal health data space regularly downloads the list of new data requests from the 
health data access body register and locally checks whether the required data types are 
available and whether Luca meets published study inclusion criteria. In the case of 
Charlie’s research, Luca’s personal health data space contains the required data and Luca 
meets the study inclusion criteria. The personal health data space application therefore 
shows the request to Luca and asks for approval. Luca gets information about Charlie’s 
background and affiliation, the planned data analysis, and the requested data categories. 
If Charlie has marked specific data categories as optional, Luca can exclude them from 
sharing. If Luca approves the request, the required data are shared directly with the health 
data access body.
The health data access body collects data from multiple personal health data spaces 
before anonymising and sharing the complete dataset with Charlie. Luca and all other 
participating citizens can choose to be notified about study updates and results provided 
by Charlie.
e845	
www.thelancet.com/digital-health   Vol 5   November 2023
Viewpoint
and trustworthy system that enables privacy for citizens 
and exploitation for data users—thus breaking the 
privacy-exploitation barrier that often stands in the way 
of medical data re-use.
Challenges for digital health ecosystems
Implementing any digital health solution is not without 
its challenges. Although centralised and federated 
systems 
each 
involve 
unique 
challenges 
and 
opportunities, they also share many. The following are 
some of the challenges and potential solutions within the 
personal health data space framework.
Data availability is an issue that both centralised and 
federated systems must reliably address to enable the 
availability of personal electronic health data for 
citizens, health-care professionals, and data users. 
Centralised systems become completely unavailable 
during system or network outages, whereas a user of a 
personal health data space can still access their health 
data, as long as they can access any participating 
personal device, and could even share data locally (eg, 
via a cable) with their physician. Replicating data across 
multiple devices within the personal health data space 
would provide resilience for the outage of single devices. 
Although temporary unavailability of data access is 
therefore unlikely in the context of a personal health 
data space, complete data loss could theoretically occur 
if all devices were to fail. However, the negative effect of 
data loss can be minimised by considering encrypted 
backups an essential part of the system (figure 2 and 
appendix p 1).
Beyond data availability, data security must also be 
maintained on an ongoing basis. Citizens who do not 
have the technical abilities to maintain the availability 
and security of their own personal health data space 
could choose data fiduciaries to provide a cloud-based 
replica of the space (figure 2). As with centralised system 
providers, these fiduciaries have the resources to address 
both data availability and security issues.
Data consistency and integrity are additional issues to 
be considered in the design of the personal health data 
space. They can be addressed through cryptographic 
methods that facilitate the keeping of a secure and 
tamper-proof audit log of all modifications, additions, 
and deletions in the personal health data space 
(appendix p 2).
Data quality always depends on the entities providing 
the data. In the envisioned system, data will be provided 
either by health-care professionals or by citizens 
themselves (through wearables, manual data entry, or 
digital health applications). Data quality cannot be 
enforced at a technical level (except for high-level 
consistency checks in structured data). However, crypto­
graphic signatures could be used to ensure the traceability 
of the creator of each piece of data, which can incentivise 
health-care professionals to provide higher quality data 
and allow for future auditability if erroneous data are 
detected. Notably, the concepts of signatures and digital 
identities are not specific to the federated implementation 
and are also elementary components of centralised 
systems. 
Standardised data formats and semantic and platform 
inter­operability are necessary to enable the inter­
connection of the various stakeholders in the EHDS—
both in a centralised approach and in the proposed 
federated solution. Work to establish common data 
formats and interoperability standards is ongoing at 
many levels and has yet to be fully resolved.
Finally, the introduction of any digital system—
federated or centralised—for managing personal health 
data must be accompanied by educational initiatives 
targeting both digital and health literacy. Education is 
necessary to enable citizens to use the provided tools 
adequately and to be able to make informed decisions 
regarding data sharing and their personal health. 
Individuals need to be trained to consider the risks of 
each method, and what categories of data should be 
shared. The flexibility of the proposed personal health 
data space approach—especially the combination of data 
fiduciaries and proxy access (appendix p 1)—could bring 
benefits to citizens who might not be able or willing to 
access or operate digital devices by themselves.
Panel 3: Introduction to differential privacy and federated learning
Differential privacy is a formal privacy-preserving technique that enables the sharing of 
personal data without leaking information that could allow the identification or re-
identification of individuals.27 It distorts individual data values (such as diagnoses, 
measurements, or laboratory values) according to a specified probability distribution. 
Although individual datasets are too distorted to directly identify corresponding 
individuals, the collection of distorted data from many individuals can still be used to 
calculate useful statistics over the whole population of participants by removing the 
expected effect of the distortion process. Differential privacy provides theoretically sound 
guarantees on the amount of leaked privacy while enabling aggregated data analysis from 
multiple citizens.
Federated learning enables analysis—including the decentralised training of machine 
learning models—directly on the devices that contain the training data. In contrast to 
traditional machine learning, training data for federated learning do not need to be 
collected in a central location. Instead, the data stay on the original devices, and the 
training algorithm is sent to the data. A typical process works as follows. A central unit 
coordinates the training and distributes an initial and untrained version of the global 
model to all participating devices. All participating devices use their data to train the 
machine learning model for a few iterations before sending their model modifications 
back to the central coordinator. The coordinator collects and aggregates all model 
changes into an updated version of the global model. This process repeats until the model 
can perform the required task sufficiently. As federated learning on its own is not a fully 
privacy-preserving method, it must be combined with formal privacy techniques such as 
differential privacy or cryptography28 to prevent adversaries from, for example, extracting 
sensitive data from the machine learning models.29 When applied correctly, federated 
learning can open up large amounts of data for training machine learning models that 
would otherwise remain unused due to privacy concerns. In particular, when combined 
thoughtfully, differential privacy and federated learning can revolutionise data sharing by 
enabling privacy-preserving data analysis and artificial intelligence.
www.thelancet.com/digital-health   Vol 5   November 2023	
e846
Viewpoint
Conclusion and outlook
Regulation and standardisation, as proposed by the 
EHDS, are necessary steps towards a harmonised, 
forward-looking digital health landscape supported by 
data-driven research. At the same time, the privacy of 
citizens should be preserved. The personal health data 
space concept presented here could not only support 
citizens’ rights to privacy but also enable a range of new 
possibilities for secondary use of data and medical 
research and innovation.
Although the ideas presented here primarily address 
the requirements of the EHDS, they can be readily 
extended to other world regions. For example, individuals 
in the USA would benefit from being able to manage and 
control all their health data in one location, something 
that is currently infeasible, even given recent regulations 
designed to end information blocking.30 Researchers 
worldwide would also benefit from access to much larger 
patient populations than would be accessible through 
individual health-care provider organisations.
Alongside the technical details of actual imple­
mentation, several open questions regarding user 
interactions remain to be solved. How should data 
requests be shown to individuals to allow them to make 
an informed decision? How can federated algorithms be 
explained to lead to a better understanding of the system? 
Moreover, a core question of any digital health system 
remains: how can digital and health literacy be improved? 
The proposed personal health data space concept 
provides a solid technical foundation for tackling these 
and other emerging questions for a future-proof, citizen-
centred, innovation-oriented digital health ecosystem.
Contributors
RR conceived and drafted the initial manuscript. AK and AZ provided 
substantial writing, reviewing, and editing of the initial draft. All authors 
critically reviewed the manuscript and made edits to reach the final 
submitted and approved version.
Declaration of interests 
AK declares funding from the Innovative Medicines Initiative 2 Joint 
Undertaking under grant agreement number 820820. ADS declares that 
she serves as a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of the German 
Society for Digital Medicine and the Strategic Advisory Board of 
HumanFirst. JK declares grants from the EU (for projects MobiliseD and 
DigiPD) and from the Bavarian Ministry of Economics (for project 
dHealthSolutions); payment for lectures from Roche/RoxHealth, 
Desitin, and Bial and for education from StreamedUP; support from 
Novartis for travel related to lecturing; a patent on gait assessment; a role 
as scientific advisor for Medical Valley Digital Health Application Center, 
Germany; membership in the patient-advisory board of EverPharma; an 
unpaid role in the European Taskforce for Digital Medical Devices; an 
unpaid advisory role in the Lux Taskforce for Health Technology 
Assessment for Digital Medical Devices; and has shares in Portabiles 
and Portabiles Healthcare Technologies. DR declares grants from the 
Alexander Humboldt Foundation, the European Research Council, the 
British Heart Foundation, Engineering and Physical Sciences Research 
Council, InnovateUK, Wellcome Trust, Horizon 2020, and German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research; and a research contract 
with Roche. RE declares a grant from the Federal Ministry of Research 
and Education for the HiGHmed consortium in the Medical Informatics 
Initiative. BME declares consulting fees from Adidas, Siemens 
Healthineers, Portabiles Healthcare Technologies, and Sivantos; 
payment from AbbVie Deutschland and AGAPLESION; and a patent 
application EP 16174268.9 (gait assessment) with Portabiles HealthCare 
Technologies. All other authors declare no competing interests. 
Acknowledgments
We thank Jürgen Geck, Leo Schwinn, and Matthias Braun for their 
feedback and comments. RR and AZ acknowledge funding provided by 
the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action under 
grant number 68GX21004F (TEAM-X). JK acknowledges the PEARL 
dHealthPD support of the Luxembourg Research Foundation. 
GK acknowledges funding by the German Federal Ministry of Education 
and Research and the Bavarian State Ministry for Science and the Arts 
through the Munich Centre for Machine Learning and the Private 
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine (PrivateAIM) projects. 
SB acknowledges funding provided by Federal Ministry for Economic 
Affairs and Climate Action of Germany under grant number 
68GX21001C (HEALTH-X). RE and HW acknowledge funding provided 
by Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action of Germany 
under grant number 68GX21001A (HEALTH-X). BME gratefully 
acknowledges the support of the German Research Foundation within 
the framework of the Heisenberg professorship programme (grant 
number ES 434/8-1). This work was supported by the Mobilise-D project 
that has received funding from the Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI) 
2 Joint Undertaking under grant agreement number 820820. This Joint 
Undertaking receives support from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme and the European Federation of 
Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (EFPIA). Content in this 
publication reflects the authors’ view and neither IMI nor the European 
Union, EFPIA, or any associated partners are responsible for any use that 
might be made of the information contained herein. 
References
1	
Courtiol P, Maussion C, Moarii M, et al. Deep learning-based 
classification of mesothelioma improves prediction of patient 
outcome. Nat Med 2019; 25: 1519–25. 
2	
Ekins S, Puhl AC, Zorn KM, et al. Exploiting machine learning for 
end-to-end drug discovery and development. Nat Mater 2019; 
18: 435–41. 
3	
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. Clinical 
practice research datalink. https://www.cprd.com/node/120 
(accessed March 29, 2023). 
4	
OPCRD. Optimum patient care research database. https://opcrd.
co.uk/ (accessed March 31, 2023). 
5	
Medical Informatics Initiative Germany. About the initiative. 
https://www.medizininformatik-initiative.de/en/about-initiative 
(accessed March 31, 2023). 
6	
Sundhedsdatastyrelsen. Health data and registers. https://
sundhedsdatastyrelsen.dk/da/english/health_data_and_registers 
(accessed Sept 6, 2022).
7	
Milieu, Timelex. Overview of the national laws on electronic health 
records in the EU member states national report for the Republic of 
Estonia. 2014. https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2016-11/
laws_estonia_en_0.pdf (accessed Sept 6, 2022).
8	
Simpson CR, Robertson C, Vasileiou E, et al. Early Pandemic 
Evaluation and Enhanced Surveillance of COVID-19 (EAVE II): 
protocol for an observational study using linked Scottish national 
data. BMJ Open 2020; 10: e039097. 
9	
OpenSAFELY. About OpenSAFELY. https://www.opensafely.org/
about/ (accessed March 31, 2023).
10	
Netzwerk Universitätsmedizin. CODEX COVID-19 data exchange 
platform. https://www.netzwerk-universitaetsmedizin.de/projekte/
codex (accessed March 31, 2023).
11	
Highmed medical informatics. Central data platform in record 
time. https://www.highmed.org/news/central-data-platform-in-
record-time (accessed March 31, 2023). 
12	
PwC Health Research Institute. Top health industry issues of 2020: 
will digital start to show an ROI? https://www.pwc.com/us/en/
industries/health-industries/assets/pwc-us-health-top-health-issues.
pdf (accessed Sept 6, 2022).
13	
Gematik. E-Patientenakte. https://www.gematik.de/anwendungen/
e-patientenakte/ (accessed Sept 6, 2022). 
14	
ELGA. Technischer aufbau im überblick. https://www.elga.gv.at/
technischer-hintergrund/technischer-aufbau-im-ueberblick/ 
(accessed Sept 6, 2022).
e847	
www.thelancet.com/digital-health   Vol 5   November 2023
Viewpoint
15	
Niazkhani Z, Toni E, Cheshmekaboodi M, Georgiou A, Pirnejad H. 
Barriers to patient, provider, and caregiver adoption and use of 
electronic personal health records in chronic care: a systematic 
review. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2020; 20: 153. 
16	
Ruhi U, Majedi A, Chugh R. Sociotechnical drivers and barriers in 
the consumer adoption of personal health records: empirical 
investigation. JMIR Med Inform 2021; 9: e30322. 
17	
European Commission Directorate-General for Health and Food 
Safety. Proposal for a regulation of the European parliament and of 
the council on the European Health Data Space. COM(2022) 197 
final. 2022. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX:52022PC0197 (accessed June 8, 2022). 
18	
European Commission Directorate-General for Health and Food 
Safety. Communication from the Commission to the European 
parliament and the council on a European Health Data Space: 
harnessing the power of health data for people, patients and 
innovation. COM(2022) 196/2. 2022. https://health.ec.europa.eu/
publications/communication-commission-european-health-data-
space-harnessing-power-health-data-people-patients-and_en 
(accessed June 8, 2022). 
19	
No authors listed. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of 
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and 
on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/
EC (General Data Protection Regulation). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679 (accessed 
Aug 31, 2023).  
20	 NEJM Catalyst. What is patient-centered care? https://catalyst.nejm.
org/doi/full/10.1056/CAT.17.0559 (accessed Sept 7, 2022).
21	
Epstein RM, Street RL Jr. The values and value of patient-centered 
care. Ann Fam Med 2011; 9: 100–03. 
22	 Morozov E. To save everything, click here: the folly of technological 
solutionism. New York: PublicAffairs, 2013. 
23	 Braun M. Represent me: please! Towards an ethics of digital twins 
in medicine. J Med Ethics 2021; 47: 394–400. 
24	
Tapuria A, Porat T, Kalra D, Dsouza G, Xiaohui S, Curcin V. 
Impact of patient access to their electronic health record: systematic 
review. Inform Health Soc Care 2021; 46: 192–204. 
25	 Bell EA, Ohno-Machado L, Grando MA. Sharing my health data: 
a survey of data sharing preferences of healthy individuals. 
AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2014; 2014: 1699–708.
26	 Kim J, Kim H, Bell E, et al. Patient perspectives about decisions to 
share medical data and biospecimens for research. 
JAMA Netw Open 2019; 2: e199550. 
27	
Dwork C, Roth A. The algorithmic foundations of differential 
privacy. Found Trends Theor Comput Sci 2014; 9: 211–407.
28	 Kaissis GA, Makowski MR, Rückert D, Braren RF. Secure, privacy-
preserving and federated machine learning in medical imaging. 
Nat Mach Intell 2020; 2: 305–11. 
29	 Kaissis G, Ziller A, Passerat-Palmbach J, et al. End-to-end privacy 
preserving deep learning on multi-institutional medical imaging. 
Nat Mach Intell 2021; 3: 473–84. 
30	 Posnack S. Information blocking: eight regulatory reminders for 
October 6th. HealthITBuzz. 2022. https://www.healthit.gov/buzz-
blog/information-blocking/information-blocking-eight-regulatory-
reminders-for-october-6th (accessed Nov 8, 2022).
Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an 
Open Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
