Original Paper
Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR)–Based
Interoperability Design in Indonesia: Content Analysis of
Developer Hub’s Social Networking Service
Lukman Heryawan1, PhD; Yukiko Mori2, MD, PhD; Goshiro Yamamoto3, PhD; Naoto Kume2, PhD; Lutfan
Lazuardi4, PhD; Anis Fuad4, DEA; Tomohiro Kuroda2, Prof Dr
1Department of Computer Science and Electronics, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Sleman, Indonesia
2Division of Medical Information Technology and Administration Planning, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
3Preemptive Medicine and Lifestyle Related Disease Research Center, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan
4Health Policy and Management, Faculty of Medicine Public Health and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Sleman, Indonesia
Corresponding Author:
Lukman Heryawan, PhD
Department of Computer Science and Electronics, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences
Universitas Gadjah Mada
Sekip utara BLS 21
Sleman, 55281
Indonesia
Phone: 62 81228944870
Email: lukmanh@ugm.ac.id
Abstract
Background: Interoperability in health care is a critical aspect for the exchange of health information. The Fast Healthcare
Interoperability Resources (FHIR) framework has become widely adopted to provide interoperable data exchange in the health
care industry. The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the significance of interoperable data in tracking patients who
have contracted the virus and keeping track of the vaccinated population. Indonesia is one of the many countries that have
implemented interoperable data systems to track patients with COVID-19, and it has aspirations to expand the system to other
use cases, particularly in the primary health care setting. The primary health care providers in Indonesia include Puskesmas
(community health centers) and private clinics.
Objective: To promote interoperable health data exchange in the primary health care sector, the Indonesian government has
launched the Satusehat project. The goal of the Satusehat platform is to make health data in Indonesia interoperable and
exchangeable between health care organizations, particularly Puskesmas and private clinics.
Methods: For a successful implementation of the Satusehat platform in Puskesmas and private clinics, it is crucial to
understand the challenges that may arise. This study analyzed the pain points of the Satusehat platform based on a content
analysis of the Satusehat Social Networking Service Telegram group messages. The study revealed the pain points and
suggested existing approaches to address them, which can be used as a proposed design of interoperability for Puskesmas and
private clinics, making it easier for these organizations to adopt the Satusehat platform.
Results: The pain points identified in this study include issues with the FHIR server, problems with FHIR profile selection,
and the mapping of electronic medical record data into standardized data, such as mapping into the Systematized Nomenclature
of Medicine Clinical Terminology. The results show that the value of the mapping issue is 37, profile issue 9, and server issue
61. Among the 3 categories, server issues had the highest population, followed by mapping issues and then profile issues. To
address these issues, the study proposed practical approaches, including a federated architecture for the FHIR server instead of
a centralized architecture, an FHIR writer and FHIR viewer system inspired by the Standardized Structured Medical Record
Information eXchange system in Japan, and an FHIR conversion framework that integrates with our FHIR writer and FHIR
viewer system.
Conclusions: These proposed solutions can help resolve the pain points identified in the study and help the advancement
of the Satusehat platform implementation in Puskesmas and private clinics in Indonesia. We believed that the proposed
solutions have potential to be adopted to other countries with similar issues when conducting nationwide project in health care
interoperability design.
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 1
(page number not for citation purposes)
JMIR Form Res 2025;9:e51270; doi: 10.2196/51270
Keywords: interoperability; Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR); COVID-19; Satusehat; Indonesia; interopera-
bility design; social networking; health information; content analysis; private clinic
Introduction
Background
Health information exchange (HIE) involves the transfer
of electronic health data between different health informa-
tion systems, including the electronic medical record (EMR)
system, the electronic health record (EHR) system, and the
personal health record (PHR) system. Notably, when the data
are controlled by a health facility, an EMR system transitions
into an EHR system. Conversely, if the data are managed
by the patient or consumer themselves, it transforms into a
PHR system [1]. To facilitate this exchange, HIE requires
a data exchange or data interoperability framework that
provides a standardized format for transferring health data
[2]. One of the organizations that provides such interopera-
bility frameworks is Health Level Seven (HL7) [3]. HL7
is a nonprofit organization that develops interoperability
frameworks, such as HL7 FHIR (Fast Healthcare Interoper-
ability Resources). It is a newer standard that provides a
modern and flexible approach to exchanging health informa-
tion. It uses a Representational State Transfer web services
approach and supports both structured and unstructured data
[4]. There have been several studies and reports on the
implementation of EHR systems using the FHIR standard
in different countries. One study, focused on the implemen-
tation of an FHIR-based EHR in Japan, highlighted some
of the challenges faced during the implementation process,
including lack of standardization and compatibility between
different systems, difficulty of data migration, and the need
for improved communication and cooperation between health
care providers [5]. Another study provided the significance
of standardization, data quality, and the need for techni-
cal support. The study also offered recommendations for
improving the implementation and adoption of FHIR-based
EHR systems [6,7].
The Ministry of Health (MoH) manages the EHR system
in Indonesia, while the EMR system is independently
managed by medical providers, such as hospitals, Puskes-
mas (community health centers), and private clinics. The
PHR system, on the other hand, is provided by the MoH
to the citizens of Indonesia [8]. In 2022, the expansion of
EMR implementation to encompass all types of health care
facilities was enacted through MoH decree number 24/2022.
This regulation is a part of the digital health transformation
blueprint released by the MoH [9]. A significant driver in
the adoption of EMR, EHR, and PHR in Indonesia has been
the COVID-19 pandemic. The PeduliLindungi app, developed
as a tool for tracking, tracing, and monitoring during the
pandemic, has become a crucial part of this initiative. This
app has been used by more than 100 million users, making it
interoperable with hundreds of laboratories and 17 telemedi-
cine service providers. Most recently, through the MoH of the
Republic of Indonesia decree number HK.01.07/MENKES/
1559/2022, health data management is now under the MoH.
Data from the PeduliLindungi app have been migrated to the
Satusehat platform, as shown in Figure 1, which will integrate
the PHR system and EMR system into a single nationwide
EHR system [10]. The Satusehat Mobile platform enables
the public to track COVID-19 vaccinations, immunization
records, and medication information from EMRs of various
health care facilities connected to this platform, using the
FHIR HL7 standard. Furthermore, the EMR systems will
be able to exchange and share data with ease through the
Satusehat platform.
Legal basis for the implementation of the Satusehat
system in Indonesia has been further strengthened with the
enactment of the Health Law number 17/2023. This legis-
lation specifically references the National Health Informa-
tion System, which is interpreted as a system based on
the Satusehat platform. The forthcoming derivative laws are
expected to lay out the structural and operational details,
ensuring a coherent and efficient implementation of these
systems across the country.
The Satusehat platform represents the cornerstone of
Indonesia’s nationwide EHR system [11]. This platform
aims to facilitate the exchange and sharing of health data,
ultimately leading to better patient care and outcomes. In
Indonesia, the Satusehat platform places a strong emphasis
on primary health care. This is caused by the referral health
care system in place, where most patients’ health data begin
with their first visit to a primary health care facility such as a
Puskesmas or private clinic. These facilities are typically the
first point of contact for patients seeking medical attention.
If the primary health care facilities are unable to provide the
necessary treatment or care, the patient will be referred to a
higher level of care, such as a hospital. This referral system is
depicted in Figure 2, which shows the progression of patients
through different levels of care within the Indonesian health
care system [12].
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 2
(page number not for citation purposes)
Figure 1. Satusehat platform’s architecture. PeduliLindungi app as a PHR is integrated to FHIR server with view only. On the other hand, hospital
information system with data from EMR could view or write with other health care applications. The FHIR server which is handled by the Ministry
of Health acts as a bridge between health care digital instances. EMR: electronic health record; FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources;
MoH: Ministry of Health; PHR: personal health record.
Figure 2. Indonesia’s health care tiered referral system. Primary care facilities such as Puskesmas or private clinics as the base and entry point of
health care service. Patient progress or referred to higher level, including secondary of tertiary facilities, if needed. This system is implemented with
HL7 FHIR between tiers, thorough IT system, and regulation. HL7 FHIR: Health Level Seven Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources.
The Satusehat platform consists of 4 primary components: the
FHIR server, the terminology server, the master data server,
and the developer hub as shown in Figure 3. The FHIR
server is responsible for providing an HL7 FHIR application
programming interface (API) for health data exchange. The
terminology server serves as a database, providing standar-
dized data references for diagnoses using ICD-10 (Interna-
tional Statistical Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision),
observations using Logical Observation Identifiers Names
and Codes (LOINC), and other clinical terms using Sys-
tematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terminology
(SNOMED-CT). The master data server is a database that
contains the nationwide identification numbers of patients or
citizen ID, practitioner data, health facilities data, pharmacies
data, financing data, and health service data. The developer
hub provides a sandbox environment for developers to test the
FHIR API offered by the MoH. Developers can experiment
and test data exchange scenarios, such as immunization, using
the provided FHIR API. The developer hub also includes
community tools, such as a video-sharing platform, a website,
and a Telegram group, to provide support and assistance to
developers while they test the Satusehat FHIR API [13].
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 3
(page number not for citation purposes)
Figure 3. Satusehat platform components that consist of FHIR server, terminology server, master data server, and developer hub. FHIR is responsible
for health data exchange, terminology server provides diagnoses terminology standardization, master data stores patient and health care instances data
(practitioners and infrastructures), and developer hub is for support center for developers when using FHIR application programming interface. HL7
FHIR: Health Level Seven Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources.
To ensure a successful implementation of the Satusehat
platform in Puskesmas and private clinics, it is crucial to
identify potential pain points in integrating EMR into the
platform from a developer’s perspective. Understanding the
underlying architecture and structure of the FHIR standard
is necessary for effective integration with EHR systems
[14]. Another reason for pain points is the lack of resour-
ces, as implementing FHIR standards can be resource-inten-
sive, requiring time and expertise. Developers may face
constraints in terms of budget and man power, which can
make it difficult to effectively implement the standard [15].
In addition, the lack of support from other stakeholders,
including health care providers and technical experts, can
also pose challenges for developers in implementing FHIR
standards [16]. The Indonesian MoH is currently in the
trial phase of the Satusehat platform. The Digital Transfor-
mation Office (DTO) of the MoH conducts workshops and
training sessions for EMR system developers and vendors
[17]. DTO also provides a website that provides step-by-step
tutorials on how to connect and exchange data from EMR
systems to the Satusehat platform using the FHIR framework,
including the standardized terminologies used for mapping
health data to standardized terminologies, such as LOINC
for observations, ICD-10 for diagnoses, and SNOMED-CT
for other health terminologies. To provide interactive support,
DTO also provides a Telegram group that developers can
join to ask for support when integrating their EMR systems
into the Satusehat platform. Based on the activities in the
Telegram group, which mostly involve questions about how
to integrate EMR systems into the Satusehat platform, we
conclude that there are some pain points when integrating
EMR systems into the Satusehat platform. This conclusion
came from analysis through the Telegram group including a
question and answer session with the DTO representative.
Objectives
The purpose of this study is to identify the challenges and
difficulties encountered by developers that are present in
situ during the integration process of EMR systems into
the Satusehat platform. To accomplish this, we will ana-
lyze the communication content in the Telegram group of
the Satusehat developer hub, which serves as an interactive
community platform for developers. By exploring the pain
points communicated by the developers in this forum, we aim
to gain a deeper understanding of the barriers and obsta-
cles encountered during the integration process. Once the
pain points have been revealed, the study proposes practical
approaches that can be used to ensure a successful integra-
tion into the Satusehat platform. These approaches are then
combined to form an interoperability design of an FHIR-
based system for EMR in Puskesmas and private clinics. The
study is organized into 4 sections. The first section introduces
the Satusehat platform, related work, and how pain points
will be revealed. The second section describes the content
analysis methods used in the study. The third section presents
the results, and the fourth section discusses the practical
approaches that will be proposed as an interoperability design
to ensure a smoother integration into the Satusehat platform.
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 4
(page number not for citation purposes)
Methods
Study Design
To uncover the pain points that are addressed in the devel-
oper hub, we conducted a content analysis of the Telegram
group’s contents. We decided to conduct the analysis to
the specific telegram group because the group is officially
managed by the DTO. It is the most active group that
contains developer discussions about EMR integration to the
Satusehat platform. Content analysis is a research method
used to make inferences by interpreting and coding written,
spoken, or visual material [18]. The analysis was conducted
at a Telegram group that consists of 1067 active members
to this day. This study focused on analyzing conversations
from December 20, 2022, the date the group was created,
until January 29, 2023. The end date was chosen because the
amount of extracted data is sufficient to support the experi-
ment, which is content analysis. Extending the time span
of chat extraction could potentially enhance the volume of
data collected and strengthen the robustness of our conclu-
sions, as the amount of data sampled in an experiment highly
depends on the subject of the study [19]. In this instance,
our focus was on Telegram as a social network service. A
total of 219 chats were chosen during this period. However,
we selected only 107 chats related to our research purpose.
These chats primarily involved developers discussing issues
encountered while integrating their EMR systems with the
Satusehat platform using FHIR standards. In our research,
we focused on issue-related chats, such as “http server
error 500,” “what FHIR profile should be used for chief
complaints,” and “SNOMED-CT or LOINC for mapping
blood glucose.” We excluded nonissue chats that contained
simple responses such as “Ok” or “thank you.” To collect
the chats, we used the Telegram menu to export them into
HTML files, which we later transferred to an Excel file.
The collected chats were later manually labeled by 2 of the
researchers (LH and ADW), who are trained to categorize
the data according to agreed and specific rules for these
issue-related chats. The labeler was chosen with taking the
research design, the amount of data being analyzed, and the
complexity of the coded classification process of the study
into account. In addition, the coding process is ensured to be
consistent and reliable with involving 2 researchers includ-
ing the author and his colleagues (LH and ADW) with a
background in information technology and understanding of
the Satusehat platform. This established intercoder reliabil-
ity in order to achieve valid interpretation of the data [20].
After conducting our content analysis and categorizing the
issues, we developed a proposed approach for each issue
category as shown in Figure 4. These proposed approaches
are feasible incorporated into the existing Satusehat platform
architecture, potentially resulting in an interoperability design
that is less burdensome for developers. By less burdensome,
we mean that the design can be easily implemented by novice
developers, which are commonly found in private clinics and
Puskesmas (community health centers). This design can be
referred to as the FHIR-based Satusehat platform interopera-
bility design for private clinics and Puskesmas. By reducing
the burden of the interoperability design, the integration of
EMR systems into the Satusehat platform in Indonesia will
be smoother. It is important to note that there are other
factors that can influence the smooth implementation beyond
the technical scope this study. For the sake of the study’s
conciseness, we will focus only on the technical issues from a
developer’s perspective.
Figure 4. The approach method of the study. Given the developer hub, as the support and assistance forum for developers to test FHIR, the Telegram
group chat content is extracted. Then, content analysis is conducted that resulted in categorization of issues and proposed solutions for each issues.
API: application programming interface; HL7 FHIR: Health Level Seven Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources.
Ethical Considerations
Public Telegram group of the Satusehat developer hub
contents was used for content analysis in this research. There
were no any extra compensation given to conduct the analysis
since the content itself is public. We acknowledge the ethical
concerns that follows while analyzing data that may raise
privacy issues. An original study relating to framework that
can be used by researchers to consider ethical issues in
web-based research also included how privacy policy and
content that were analyzed on specific web-based platform
should be reviewed. The collected data have to be accessi-
ble to public, focused to the content, and not the individual
who posted the content [21]. In addition, taking into account
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 5
(page number not for citation purposes)
the public nature of the group and also Telegram’s privacy
policy relating to public chats, we believe that group members
implicitly consented to having their data accessible publicly
[22]. Following the logics provided in the framework and
Telegram’s privacy policy, the exemption of additional ethics
review is feasible for this study. This study was reviewed
by the Medical and Health Research Ethics Committee
Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing, Universi-
tas Gadjah Mada-Dr. Sardjito General Hospital, Indonesia
(KE/FK/0204/EC/2023).
The focus of this study is to analyze the content of the
public developer hub and not on the individual who posted
in the developer hub. Therefore, anonymization is applied
to the data that are collected and presented in this study to
ensure group participant’s data privacy and confidentiality.
According to other literatures, it is stated that waiver of
consent could be requested when no identifying information
is presented. Also, permission of further use of the data is
permitted if the data are freely available on public forum
[23]. Considering aforementioned points, acquiring consent
was not necessary for this research. However, it is important
to get consent in general for research using data from people.
In our case, it was not possible to get informed consent due to
the scope of our research.
Results
Overview
The results of our study are divided into 2 sections for clarity
and organization. The first section outlines the pain points
and issues with the Satusehat platform, which were identified
through content analysis of the Satusehat Social Networking
Service Telegram group messages. These pain points include
issues with the FHIR server, difficulties in selecting the
appropriate FHIR profile, and challenges in mapping EMR
data into standardized data formats such as SNOMED-CT
terminology [24]. Implementing and maintaining an FHIR
server may be challenging due to the interoperability, security
concerns, and scalability. Selecting the appropriate FHIR
profile gives difficulties in aligning with specific use cases,
balancing flexibility, and considering long-term maintenance.
Mapping EMR data into standardized data formats such as
SNOMED-CT could be challenging due to data complex-
ity, granularity, updates, and achieving semantic interopera-
bility. The second section of our study presents proposed
designs that aim to address the pain points identified in
the first section. We believe that the proposed designs will
help overcome the challenges that may arise during the
implementation of the Satusehat platform in primary health
care settings, such as Puskesmas and private clinics. These
proposed designs include a federated architecture for the
FHIR server to ensure reliable and distributed server load
management, an FHIR writer and viewer system inspired
by the successful Standardized Structured Medical Record
Information eXchange (SS-MIX) system in Japan [25], and
an FHIR conversion framework that integrates with our FHIR
writer and FHIR viewer system.
Pain Points
Based on content analysis of the Satusehat Social Networking
Service Telegram group messages, we identified 3 main types
of issues faced by developers: server issues, profile issues,
and mapping issues as illustrated in Multimedia Appendix
1. Among the 3 categories, server issues had the highest
population with 61 chats, followed by mapping issues with
37 identified chats and then profile issues with 9 chats. Our
data collection method allowed us to focus on the issues and
concerns that developers faced when integrating their EMR
systems with Satusehat platform using FHIR standards.
Proposed Design
The Satusehat platform is built on a centralized architecture,
which is illustrated in Figure 5. To ensure authentication,
the platform uses an OAuth server [14]. Once a user is
authenticated, they can access the FHIR resources available
on the platform through the FHIR API. However, based
on the developers’ perspective, connecting to the Satusehat
platform can be challenging. We have identified this issue
as a server issue. Sometimes, the Satusehat platform server
fails to respond to the user’s request, resulting in errors
such as HTTP Error 401—Unauthorized, HTTP status 403—
Forbidden, HTTP status 404—Not Found, and HTTP status
500—Internal Server Error [26].
To overcome this issue, we propose a federated server
architecture instead of a centralized server architecture [27],
as shown in Figure 6. In this approach, the FHIR resources
are stored in local or regional servers that are subordinate
to the central server. Periodically, the central server inquiries
about the FHIR resources and copies them to the central
server. This approach ensures high reliability for both the
central and local or regional servers, resulting in a more
robust exchange of FHIR resources. By implementing the
federated server architecture, the exchange of FHIR resources
will be more reliable, making it easier for authenticated users
to post, get, put, and patch the FHIR resources from the
Satusehat platform.
The issue of mapping is a significant challenge faced
by developers working on the Satusehat platform. Health
care facilities in Indonesia use various local terminologies,
which are often in Indonesian or local tribal languages, such
as Javanese. In contrast, standardized terminologies such as
ICD-10 for diagnosis and ICD-9-CM (International Classifi-
cation of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification)
for medical procedures are in non-Indonesian languages,
such as English [28]. This presents a significant challenge
in mapping the various local terminologies with their many
variations into a single standardized terminology in English.
We believe that this issue is not only unique to Indonesia
but also affects other countries whose national language is
not English, such as Japan, Taiwan, and Thailand [29]. To
overcome this challenge, we propose an approach that is
similar to the one used in Japan. The Japanese approach uses
the FHIR conversion framework [30]. In this approach, the
conversion is done only on the terminology code and not
on the terminology text. The written terminology still uses
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 6
(page number not for citation purposes)
the local language, such as Japanese, but the code follows
the standardized code. This approach reduces the complex-
ity of the mapping task significantly. The FHIR conver-
sion framework is illustrated in Figure 7. By implementing
this approach, we can ensure that the Satusehat platform
can handle the mapping of various local terminologies into
standardized terminologies in a more efficient and effective
way.
In addition, automating the code conversion process is
much simpler than the text conversion process because the
variations in code are relatively small. This approach not
only reduces the workload for developers but also ensures
the accuracy and consistency of the mapping process. The
last issue concerns the challenge of selecting and apply-
ing the correct FHIR profiles to EMR data. While there
is an implementation guide available to guide users in
selecting the appropriate profiles for specific use cases, such
as outpatient medical resumes and immunization records,
manually selecting and applying the profiles can still be
difficult. To address this issue, we propose a solution that
involves feeding EMR data into a system that automatically
selects the correct FHIR profile and builds the content of that
profile based on the input data. Similar approaches have been
implemented in countries that have standardized their health
data using HL7 standards, such as Japan’s use of HL7 V 2.5
to standardize various health data into a storage system called
the SS-MIX [28]. The SS-MIX system has been successful in
facilitating HIE in Japan. Since both SS-MIX and FHIR are
from HL7, we believe that it would be feasible to adopt the
SS-MIX system and modify it to use HL7 FHIR structures
instead of HL7 V 2.5 structures. This is a practical solution as
there are already open structures and guidelines available to
implement SS-MIX. We simply need to modify the structure
to use HL7 FHIR data.
Figure 5. Satusehat current architecture. The platform was built on centralized architecture and database [27]. Authenticated institutions or
individuals are able to access the Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources in the central database. Writer identifies this as the root of server
issue stated in developer hub.
Figure 6. Our proposed solution: Satusehat with federated architecture [27]. The central server periodically fetch and add Fast Healthcare Interopera-
bility Resources that are stored in local servers with the aim to enhance reliability and robustness of the platform.
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 7
(page number not for citation purposes)
Figure 7. FHIR conversion framework to address mapping issues [14]. Japanese terminology for medication data, in the name attribute (2mg.CER-
CINE TABLETS) is preserved in hospital EMR to ensure readability. The corresponding standardized code (such as ICD-10 [International Statistical
Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision]) is mapped into the FHIR server with terminology mapping. EMR: electronic medical record; FHIR:
FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources
Discussion
Principal Findings
Server issue, mapping issue, and profile issue are identified
as the most frequent problems that developers faced when
integrating EMR and Satusehat with FHIR protocol. The
proposed design for an interoperable FHIR-based Satusehat
platform tailored to the needs of Puskesmas (community
health centers) and private clinics is depicted in Figure
8, which illustrates the combined approaches that have
led to a more reliable and user-friendly platform. The
design integrates several key features, including a federated
architecture that distributes the data, a data mapping system
that ensures consistency across diverse health care terminol-
ogies, and an automated selection and implementation of
appropriate FHIR profiles for EMR data.
Figure 8. Our proposed design for FHIR-based Satusehat platform. It consists of federated architecture between central server and hospital
information system in local or regional server as FHIR client, local terminology system mapping, and automated FHIR profile selection. Fast
Healthcare Interoperability Resources; IHS: Indonesia Health Services; PHR: personal health record.
To address the mapping and profile issues related to data,
we propose an FHIR writer and viewer system that combines
the FHIR conversion framework and the SS-MIX system.
This system can be deployed on both local and regional
servers to ensure accessibility for health care facilities such
as Puskesmas, hospitals, and private clinics. To use this
system, hospital information systems or EMR systems feed
data into the FHIR writer subsystem. The FHIR writer then
converts the local code into standardized code and selects the
appropriate profile to be inserted with the standardized data.
The FHIR profile, filled with standardized data, is then stored
or prepared in the local or regional server and is ready to be
queried by a central server. If health care facilities want to
view patient data from their own facilities, their EMR system
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 8
(page number not for citation purposes)
can make a request to the local or regional server to view
the patient data. If the data are not available in the local or
regional server, the server continues the request to the central
server to retrieve the data using FHIR API. In this way,
the local or regional server acts as an FHIR client, and the
central server acts as an FHIR server in terms of the client-
server connection [29]. Our proposed FHIR writer and viewer
system provides a standardized approach to data mapping
and FHIR profile selection, ensuring consistency and ease
of use for health care facilities. It also allows for efficient
querying of patient data across multiple facilities, increasing
the interoperability and accessibility of health data. The issue
of server architecture is a critical consideration in devel-
oping an efficient and reliable health information system.
In particular, the ability to handle large volumes of data
and ensure seamless data exchange across different health
care providers is crucial. The approach to addressing this
challenge lies in the use of federated architecture. Federated
architecture offers a scalable and flexible solution to server
issues by distributing the load across multiple servers [30].
This ensures that the server load is manageable even during
peak periods, such as when there is an automatic processing
of EMR data. By spreading the load, federated architecture
also enhances the reliability of the system, making it more
robust and resilient. Moreover, federated architecture is an
ideal solution for countries such as Indonesia, which has
a vast archipelago with numerous islands separated by sea.
With federated architecture, health facilities in remote areas
can be connected to a centralized health information system,
enabling the efficient exchange of health data and improv-
ing patient care. To fully leverage the benefits of federated
architecture, an automated FHIR writer or viewer system can
be implemented. This system enables the automatic conver-
sion of local codes to standardized codes, the selection of
appropriate FHIR profiles, and the storage and retrieval of
patient data from local and regional servers. The system can
be easily deployed and customized to suit the specific needs
of Puskesmas, private clinics, and hospitals. By using this
approach, health care providers can efficiently access patient
data, resulting in improved health care outcomes for patients.
Although our proposed design is based on a small amount of
chats in the Satusehat Telegram group, we recognize that this
group is the most interactive channel for developers seeking
support in integrating their EMR systems into the Satusehat
platform. Therefore, despite the limited data, we believe that
most of the issues related to integrating EMR systems into
Satusehat using the FHIR framework have been recorded in
the Satusehat Telegram group. By analyzing and addressing
these issues, we were able to develop a design that effectively
addresses the common challenges faced by developers. We
also recognize that ongoing monitoring and analysis of the
Satusehat Telegram group will be critical for identifying and
addressing new issues that arise as the platform continues to
evolve. Our proposed design for the FHIR-based Satusehat
platform can be a valuable solution for other countries facing
similar challenges in implementing HIE systems. While we
drew inspiration from the design of Japan’s HIE system,
which shares similar characteristics with Indonesia, such as
a non-English language and multiple islands, our approach is
adaptable and scalable to meet the needs of other countries.
By collaborating and sharing knowledge, countries facing
similar issues can learn from each other to enhance the
implementation of FHIR-based platforms such as Satusehat.
This approach could foster the development of a regional-
level HIE system in ASEAN countries or even beyond,
incorporating other Asian countries such as Japan, Taiwan,
and India, which have already implemented HIE systems
[31]. By working together, we are able to create a more
efficient and effective HIE system that benefits all participat-
ing countries.
Limitations
The content analysis in the study was limited into specific
time frame (December 20, 2022, to January 29, 2023) and
a small size sample of 107 chats. It was originated from
the developer hub’s Telegram group that was managed by
the DTO of Indonesia MoH. The telegram also addresses
only the technical pain points from developers’ perspective to
integrate their EMR to Satusehat platform. Also, the proposed
approaches based on the identified pain points have not been
implemented to the existing Satusehat platform.
Future Works
After gaining an understanding of the challenges faced by
the Satusehat platform and proposing an interoperability
design for the platform, our next step is to develop an FHIR
writer or viewer system that is tailored to the Satusehat
platform. To accomplish this, we plan to collaborate with an
EMR system developer for the purpose of collecting EMR
data. These data will be used to train and test the FHIR
writer or viewer system, to determine whether the EMR
data can be standardized based on the FHIR-based Satuse-
hat platform, and to determine whether it can be viewed
back by the same EMR system. We are also interested in
collaborating with researchers from Japan, whose approach
to building the SS-MIX system has inspired our proposed
design. By working together, we aim to create an FHIR-com-
pliant version of SS-MIX that can not only be used in the
Satusehat platform in Indonesia but also has the potential to
be implemented in Japan. With this joint collaboration, the
FHIR-based SS-MIX can facilitate cross-country border HIE
by ensuring interoperability and seamless exchange of health
data between the 2 countries.
Conclusions
For ensuring successful implementation of the Satusehat
platform, this paper proposes content analysis as a way to
identify pain points that are faced by developers during
development. Analyzing Satu Sehat developers’ discussions
on social networking system, we have identified 3 top pain
points about Satusehat platform: server issues, data mapping,
and difficulties managing user profiles. We have showed
how using federated server architecture, an FHIR writer
and an FHIR viewer, and an FHIR conversion framework
could address the mentioned issues. The proposed architec-
ture for solving pain points gives several suggestions as
a blueprint on how to reduce developer workload when
committing integration, increasing the robustness of the
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
resources exchange, and ensure accuracy and consistency on
mapping and also profiling process. All of this will further
help the advancement of Satusehat platform implementation
in Puskesmas (community health centers) and private clinics
in Indonesia.
Acknowledgments
This research was conducted without the use of ChatGPT or any similar generative artificial intelligence model for ideation,
method execution, manuscript writing, and referencing process. This work is the result of collaborative works and within the
authors. The information and sources that are included in this work have been carefully checked for accuracy. This research
was made possible by the collaboration with Medical informatics Lab in Kyoto University, Japan, and Software and Data
Engineering Lab in Universitas Gadjah Mada, Indonesia. This work was supported by the Department of Computer Science
and Electronics, Universitas Gadjah Mada, under the Publication Funding Year 2025.
Data Availability
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during this study are not publicly available due to the Satusehat privacy policy
but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Conflicts of Interest
None declared.
Multimedia Appendix 1
Most prominent pain points perceived by developers when testing Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources from the
Telegram group (developer hub).
[PNG File (Portable Network Graphics File), 30 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]
References
1.
Sonoda T. Evolution of electronic medical record solutions. Fujitsu Sci Tech J. Jan 1, 2011;47:19-27.
2.
Ishigure Y. Trends, standardization, and interoperability of healthcare information. NTT Tech Rev. 2011;9(4):57-62.
[doi: 10.53829/ntr201104gls]
3.
Joyia GJ, Akram MU, Akbar CN, Maqsood MF. Evolution of health level-7: a survey. Presented at: Proceedings of the
2018 International Conference on Software Engineering and Information Management; Jan 4, 2018:118-123;
Casablanca, Morocco. [doi: 10.1145/3178461.3178480]
4.
Mandel JC, Kreda DA, Mandl KD, Kohane IS, Ramoni RB. SMART on FHIR: a standards-based, interoperable apps
platform for electronic health records. J Am Med Inform Assoc. Sep 2016;23(5):899-908. [doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocv189]
[Medline: 26911829]
5.
Xiao D, Song C, Nakamura N, Nakayama M. Development of an application concerning fast healthcare interoperability
resources based on standardized structured medical information exchange version 2 data. Comput Methods Programs
Biomed. Sep 2021;208:106232. [doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106232] [Medline: 34174764]
6.
Faulkenberry JG, Luberti A, Craig S. Electronic health records, mobile health, and the challenge of improving global
health. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care. Jan 2022;52(1):101111. [doi: 10.1016/j.cppeds.2021.101111] [Medline:
34969611]
7.
Dullabh P, Heaney-Huls K, Hovey L, et al. The technology landscape of patient-centered clinical decision support—
where are we and what is needed? Stud Health Technol Inform. Jun 6, 2022;290:350-353. [doi: 10.3233/SHTI220094]
[Medline: 35673033]
8.
Harahap NC, Handayani PW, Hidayanto AN. The challenges in integrated personal health record adoption in Indonesia:
a qualitative analysis of regulatory perspectives. Presented at: 2021 International Conference on Informatics,
Multimedia, Cyber and Information System (ICIMCIS); Oct 2021:169-174; Jakarta, Indonesia. [doi: 10.1109/
ICIMCIS53775.2021.9699353]
9.
Ministry of Health of the Republic of Indonesia. Blueprint for digital health transformation strategy 2024. 2021. URL:
https://dto.kemkes.go.id/ENG-Blueprint-for-Digital-Health-Transformation-Strategy-Indonesia%202024.pdf [Accessed
2024-02-25]
10.
Chong HY, Allotey PA, Chaiyakunapruk N. Current landscape of personalized medicine adoption and implementation in
Southeast Asia. BMC Med Genomics. Oct 26, 2018;11(1):94. [doi: 10.1186/s12920-018-0420-4] [Medline: 30367635]
11.
Saputra Y, Ashila MN, Muliarini P. Readiness and acceptance of electronic medical records among health professionals
in indonesia. Presented at: Proceedings of International Conference of Graduate School on Sustainability; Nov 4-5,
2022:81-92; Malang, Indonesia.
12.
Handayani PW, Saladdin IR, Pinem AA, Azzahro F, Hidayanto AN, Ayuningtyas D. Health referral system user
acceptance model in Indonesia. Heliyon. Dec 2018;4(12):e01048. [doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2018.e01048] [Medline:
30603690]
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 10
(page number not for citation purposes)
13.
Postman. URL: https://www.postman.com/satusehat/satusehat-public/overview [Accessed 2023-02-19]
14.
Lee YL, Lee HA, Hsu CY, Kung HH, Chiu HW. Implement an international interoperable PHR by FHIR—a Taiwan
innovative application. Sustainability. 2020;13(1):198. [doi: 10.3390/su13010198]
15.
Harbi A. Health care expert’s readiness to implement National Unified Medical Records (NUMR) system in the United
Arab Emirates: a qualitative study. IJCAI. 2021;45(5). [doi: 10.31449/inf.v45i5.3358]
16.
Bender D, Sartipi K. HL7 FHIR: an agile and restful approach to healthcare information exchange. Presented at:
Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems; Jun 2013:326-331; Porto,
Portugal.
17.
DTO kementerian kesehatan—home page. dto.kemkes.go.id. URL: https://dto.kemkes.go.id/ [Accessed 2023-02-19]
18.
Renz SM, Carrington JM, Badger TA. Two strategies for qualitative content analysis: an intramethod approach to
triangulation. Qual Health Res. Apr 2018;28(5):824-831. [doi: 10.1177/1049732317753586] [Medline: 29424274]
19.
Kim H, Jang SM, Kim SH, Wan A. Evaluating sampling methods for content analysis of Twitter data. Soc Media + Soc.
Apr 2018;4(2):205630511877283. [doi: 10.1177/2056305118772836]
20.
O’Connor C, Joffe H. Intercoder reliability in qualitative research: debates and practical guidelines. Int J Qual Methods.
Jan 1, 2020;19:160940691989922. [doi: 10.1177/1609406919899220]
21.
Cilliers L, Viljoen K. A framework of ethical issues to consider when conducting internet-based research. SA J Inform
Manage. 2021;23(1):a1215. [doi: 10.4102/sajim.v23i1.1215]
22.
Telegram. Telegram privacy policy. URL: https://telegram.org/privacy/id?setln=en [Accessed 2024-04-23]
23.
Tripathy JP. Secondary data analysis: ethical issues and challenges. Iran J Public Health. Dec 2013;42(12):1478-1479.
[Medline: 26060652]
24.
Döring M. Evaluating an approach for mapping FHIR profiles to research protocols [Doctoral dissertation].
Hochschulbibliothek der Technischen Hochschule Köln; 2018.
25.
Japan Association for Medical Informatics. SS-MIX2 standardized storage’ explanation of the structure and guidelines
for implementation ver. 1.2. 2014. URL: https://www.jami.jp/jamistd/docs/SSMIX2/descript-implemglonSS-MIX2_V1.
2.pdf [Accessed 2023-02-19]
26.
TIBCO. TIBCO product documentation. docs.tibco.com. URL: https://docs.tibco.com/pub/bwpluginhl7/8.1.0/doc/html/
GUID-20E40FAF-6F0B-41D6-8257-3387607178DA.html [Accessed 2023-02-19]
27.
Vesteghem C, Brøndum RF, Sønderkær M, et al. Implementing the FAIR Data Principles in precision oncology: review
of supporting initiatives. Brief Bioinform. May 21, 2020;21(3):936-945. [doi: 10.1093/bib/bbz044] [Medline: 31263868]
28.
Quan H, Li B, Saunders LD, et al. Assessing validity of ICD-9-CM and ICD-10 administrative data in recording clinical
conditions in a unique dually coded database. Health Serv Res. Aug 2008;43(4):1424-1441. [doi: 10.1111/j.1475-6773.
2007.00822.x] [Medline: 18756617]
29.
Aljunid SM, Srithamrongsawat S, Chen W, et al. Health-care data collecting, sharing, and using in Thailand, China
mainland, South Korea, Taiwan, Japan, and Malaysia. Value Health. 2012;15(1 Suppl):S132-S138. [doi: 10.1016/j.jval.
2011.11.004] [Medline: 22265060]
30.
Hisashi Osanai—effort to internationalize a FHIR implementation guide in Japan | devdays. www.youtube.com. 2022.
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HwAxcdKfbxY [Accessed 2023-02-19]
31.
Dornan L, Pinyopornpanish K, Jiraporncharoen W, Hashmi A, Dejkriengkraikul N, Angkurawaranon C. Utilisation of
electronic health records for public health in Asia: a review of success factors and potential challenges. Biomed Res Int.
2019;2019:7341841. [doi: 10.1155/2019/7341841] [Medline: 31360723]
Abbreviations
API: application programming interface
DTO: Digital Transformation Office
EHR: electronic health record
EMR: electronic medical record
FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources
HIE: health information exchange
HL7: Health Level Seven
ICD-10: International Statistical Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision
ICD-9-CM: International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification
LOINC: Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes
MoH: Ministry of Health
PHR: personal health record
SNOMED-CT: Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terminology
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 11
(page number not for citation purposes)
SS-MIX: Standardized Structured Medical Record Information eXchange
Edited by Amaryllis Mavragani; peer-reviewed by Benjamin Senst, Grahame Grieve, Jemima Frimpong; submitted
27.07.2023; final revised version received 20.05.2024; accepted 26.05.2024; published 21.04.2025
Please cite as:
Heryawan L, Mori Y, Yamamoto G, Kume N, Lazuardi L, Fuad A, Kuroda T
Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR)–Based Interoperability Design in Indonesia: Content Analysis of
Developer Hub’s Social Networking Service
JMIR Form Res 2025;9:e51270
URL: https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
doi: 10.2196/51270
© Lukman Heryawan, Yukiko Mori, Goshiro Yamamoto, Naoto Kume, Lutfan Lazuardi, Anis Fuad, Tomohiro Kuroda.
Originally published in JMIR Formative Research (https://formative.jmir.org), 21.04.2025. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work, first published in
JMIR Formative Research, is properly cited. The complete bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on
https://formative.jmir.org, as well as this copyright and license information must be included.
JMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH
Heryawan et al
https://formative.jmir.org/2025/1/e51270
JMIR Form Res 2025 | vol. 9 | e51270 | p. 12
(page number not for citation purposes)
